Epicureanism may be the least popular view in European history, or at least the most reviled. Dante famously viewed the Epicureans in the final circle of Hell, a strangely honorable position, given how unpopular the view was in the Middle Ages. It seems to have almost been forgotten about. It's worth inquiring whether Epicureanism is unpopular (despite being the view that is most in line with all of our evidence) because most people have a constitutional need to believe in the immaterial. Or whether the Platonic-Christian worldview is simply so deeply embedded in the European mind that it is only with great difficulty that the belief in the immaterial can be purged from our mental framework. It is suggestive that the peak of popularity for Epicureanism seems to have coincided with the peak of the Roman Republic, just before the rise of Christianity. On the other hand, we can see in Cicero and in Plutarch the same unwillingness to believe in only the physical world, that we later see in Christian and post-Christian writers. (I use the phrase "post-Christian" to identify writers who are ostensibly atheists, or who at least attempt to separate their religious beliefs from the philosophical beliefs, but who are nonetheless unable to escape from the Platonic-Christian paradigm simply because their minds were fixed in it in childhood.)

Kant was so terrified of the neo-Epicurean ontology raised again by Hobbes and Newton that he made the ultimate sacrifice to maintain Christianity, taking Protestantism to its logical conclusion in the process, by conceding that the notion of a soul, a God, an afterlife, were not empirically supportable concepts. Yes, he said, the world looks to all intents and purposes, like the Epicureans say it is. But, if it were, there would not be morality in the sense that I understand it and I would not live forever. Therefore, there must be another dimension, as it were, where I exist outside of time and space. And that is where God exists as well. And this phenomenal world only appears to have a stable structure and obeys laws because of the structure of the human soul, as arranged by God. Kant obfuscated it as much as he could, but of course he still has some magical elements in his philosophy - namely the process by which the human mind orders the chaos of sensations into a structured phenomenal world. Readers are so dazzled by the baroque structure of the 1st Critique and its impressive array of arguments and concepts that they forget to ask about how this ordering occurs. It occurs by magic! It is really no better than Descartes's pineal gland. 

The human mind is not constructed to seek the truth. It is constructed to seek for joy. And, as the father of any young child knows, nothing brings more joy than believing in magic. After all, we do possess a kind of magic in our ability to control our own body. We want a cookie? We can make our arm move to grab the cookie. Why, then, could not the human mind categorize and order a chaotic stream of perceptions that was presented to it and thereby construct the phenomenal world? Or why could not I apply a magical veneer to an action by doing it out of duty, and imbue with the magical quality of being good? Or why could I not I survive the death of my body? Magic lies deep in our psychology and one must be disciplined in order to purge it out. Even the logical positivists could not do it, because they still wished to impose, through the sheer force of their wills, meaninglessness on meaningful statements. The most fundamental concept of causation we have is agent causation, and so we must be forever on our guard for creating little homunculi to serve as agent-causes for natural phenomena. But in the case of transcendental idealism, we are the agents, although we do not know it ourselves. All the categorization happens below the level of, or prior to, our consciousness.

Kant attempted to remove God and the soul from this dimension, but he was not able to completely expel them, because he was not prepared to expel a priori truths, and, in particular, a prior moral truths. Thus, there remained a little wormhole through which the noumenal soul could have a non-physical causal impact on the phenomena. How ironic that this little remnant kernel of magical thinking, is the seed from which all Continental philosophy has grown. Despite all the rhetoric about the death of metaphysics, the root of the divide is metaphysical. The key question is whether the physical world is metaphysically prior to the conscious world, or whether the conscious world is metaphysically prior to the physical world. If one believes the latter, and that something unconscious (but not physical) gives rise to to the conscious world, whether it be the world-spirit, desires, language, culture, etc., then one is a Continental. If one doesn't (or if one wishes to further interrogate the meaning of the proposition before one assents to anything), then one is likely an Analytic. The distinction should really be between Continental and non-Continental philosophers. If one accepts some form of neo-Kantian transcendental idealism (perhaps without even knowing it oneself), then one is a Continental. If not, one is a non-Continental. 

But to be Analytic carries the further implication that philosophy needed to be reinvented in the early 20th century, and specifically by claiming that German Idealism was meaningless. But we do not need to accept this, nor should we. German Idealism is FALSE, not meaningless. It, just like Schopenhauer, Hegel, Heidegger, and Derrida, depends upon the premise that there is something metaphysically capable of structuring our stream of consciousness OTHER THAN OUR PHYSICAL CONSTITUTION. And this premise the Epicurean denies. Our conscious lives are tightly governed by forces outside our control, but they are not desires, the world-spirit, anxiety, or differance. They are our genes, our perceptual systems, the structure of our brains, our hormones, etc. Psychological propositions do not take primacy over physical propositions. The world is not any such and such a way because of our consciousness. Rather, it is quite the reverse. But we do not need to make the further mistake, made by the logical positivists (and made in their hearts by most Analytic philosophers today, only they do not make it a self-defeating maxim) that this claim is meaningless. We understand what they mean when the say that "there is no real opposition between what is traditionally taken to be a subject-independent world that is present to us in the mode of “givenness” and “being” and a world that is conceived of as subject-dependent in that it is formed by conceptual tools or other “thought-ingredients” stemming from some subjective activity or other" (Paul Guyer, "Idealism," Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2021). They mean that the noumena are superfluous, we don't need them, let us dispense with them! The only true world is the world of phenomena. (This is, by the way, a sort-of inverse Epicureanism. We say, let's dispense with the distinction, because the phenomena ARE noumena.)

The Continentals, it seems, took Nietzsche's rhetoric too seriously. Or rather, they found his sort of Romantic-apocalpytic aesthetic too enticing to not mimic. They thus averred that free will, morality, meaningfulness, etc. were actually incompatible with a materialist worldview. (But of course Nietzsche, as a scholar of Hellenistic philosophy, would surely have known about the existence of a viable school of thought, in Epicureanism, that keeps all these intact. Proving again that Nietzsche is not often to be taken literally, but that's the subject of another essay.) Even contemporary English-speaking philosophers who skirt the line between Analytic and Continental philosophy seem to believe that endorsing physicalism is tantamount to becoming a nihilist, or at least a skeptic about ethical claims, or claims about the meaning of life. Thus, Simon Critchley writes that, after the Scientific Revolution of the 18th century:

	Nature is no longer the visible expression of some ‘world soul’ in which humans also participate. Rather, nature is sheer, impersonal objective ‘stuff’, which is law governed, causally explicable, but completely cut adrift from human intentions.
	If that is so, then the problem for us moderns is clear: in the face of the disenchantment of nature brought about by the scientific revolution, we experience a gap between knowledge and wisdom that has the consequence of divesting our lives of meaning. The question is: can nature or indeed human selves become re-enchanted in such a way that reduces or even eliminates the meaning gap and produces some plausible conception of a good life? (Continental Philosophy: A Very Short Introduction, pp.8-9)

Continental philosophy "re-enchants" nature by turning humans into gods. Our subconscious mind, according to the the Continentals, is capable of molding reality to such an extent that, for example for Derrida, it applies logic onto a would which is naturally chaotic (although imperfectly). Of course, they would not assent to my talk of a subconscious mind. They would rather say that consciousness is the fundamental reality, and that there is no entity being causally efficacious here. Rather, it is just the way things are. But by making human consciousness the fundamental reality, they are ipso facto making humans into Berkeleyean gods. They seek to retain the cozy Aristotelian world of hylomorphism by making the world a synthesis of their objectivity and subjectivity, in place of form and matter. Can such a feeble little creature really be the be-all and end-all of the universe. Can the fabric of reality be ripped asunder by the consciousness of inhaling a little ether? The Continentals are Thales reincarnated, except that they forget the world through focus on the self, consciousness, and self-consciousness, rather than focusing on the cosmos. 

A better response to the "disenchantment" of Nature is to say 'it is well; it is unbecoming of a full-grown man to believe in enchantments.' Let us purge anything non-physical from our ontology (although not from our language -- the concept of non-physical entities being so necessary to our thought process although ironically the concept itself is a physical entity). But does this purge imply, as Critchley assumes (without arguement) that it does, that there is no more notion of a good life? No, only that human flourishing is the good. That nothing magical attaches itself to some actions which makes them "good" while another magical property attaches itself to some actions which makes them "bad." Human flourishing is the only good. Actions that bring about human flourishing may be called "good" metaphorically, but, unless the person performing the action is made happy through it, or reinforces a virtue through it, the action does carry any moral valence, because...and it is difficult to wrap one's head around this notion...moral goodness is a physical property. It's a brain state, or rather a body state. 

But why did the Epicurean world-view not resurge along with the Analytic tradition? The post-Kantians, leading to Hegel, had clearly built castles in the air. The Hegelian system is beautiful and rich, and perhaps unequaled in its quality. But its actual contact with reality is almost nil. But Kant's original position had been that only the phenomena are intelligible, everything else is either inferred from the objective existence of morality (rather dubiously) or a matter of faith alone. Why not take the further step and say that the noumena should be dispensed with, or that the phenomena are noumena? Why not attempt to ground everything in physical reality. To be fair, some Analytics have done that. J.J.C. Smart cannot be praised too highly for his metaphysics (although not for his ethics). But why hasn't Epicureanism become the dominant view? One reason is the persistence of religion. That's the subject of another essay. Another reason, though, is that there is a subtle Kantian or even German idealism lurking in the origins of Analytic philosophy, namely in the figure of Wittgenstein's Tractatus. The Tractatus begins with axioms that declare that the world is made up of facts. linguistic turn, etc.

The Enlightenment was born not in the 1700s, but in the 300s BC. But it was obscured and ignored until it was rediscovered after the weakening of the Church under the Reformation. What is not widely recognized is that shortly after it was rediscovered, it was again obscured and ignored by the Christian Modern philosophers. It seems that the majority of humans is simply constitutionally incapable of handling the truth of Epicureanism, and constitutionally incapable of living under the precepts of the French Revolution.

If states of affairs really were the primary constituents of the world, as the Analytics implicitly belief, then their work would be of tremendous value. If "the mind is composed of a set of functions" could serve as an metaphysical claim, as they implicitly hold that it does, then functionalism would be a fascinating topic of study. But states of affairs are not primary entities. They are brain states, imperfectly overlapping between the speaker and the hearer. And the mind is a physical object, the brain, so functionalism does not get off the ground.

What the Continentals have not grasped is a basic truth known to Epicurus in the 400s BC, namely that to "rise above our mortal nature" is only achievable in the sense that we can recognize that certain of our psychological structures are not beneficial to us. They may have been useful in the tribal days, but no longer. One such is the constant striving for more: "the living creature wanders as though in search of something that is missing, and to look for some other thing by which he can fulfil the good of the soul and the good of the body." A rational confrontation with this fact disperses this tempest of the soul. But the Continentals choose to amplify instead this desire, by setting up a fantastical world where we are manifestations of the Will (Schopenhauer), or Ubermenches (Nietzsche), or special beings that synthesize the first-person and third-person perspectives (Heidegger), or special beings that somehow impose the bivalence of truth on the world (Derrida). They thus set up a world of conceptual art or conceptual magic, where philosophers only can tap in to the deep truth.