Heidegger rightly points out that, as a psychological matter, objects are usually perceived by humans in terms of their usefulness. Thus a hammer is perceived not as a massive object composed of steel and wood, but as a tool, used for hammering. He incorrectly makes a metaphysical thesis out of this, by implying that, because conscious experience is the fundamental basis of knowledge about the world, the hammer is a tool to the same degree, or even to a greater degree, than it is a collection of iron and carbon particles, i.e., the physical understanding of the item. How do I know that the physical understanding is primary? Well, using physics and chemistry, I can go away and make a flavorless, odorless pill that can end Heidegger's (or his leader's) conscious experience forever. But I cannot use my conscious experience to make any physical changes whatsoever. In Heidegger's world, telekinesis should be possible. But it isn't. In the real world, I can die in my own house without any foreknowledge or conscious experience, simply from a carbon monoxide leak.

But, back to the psychology, whenever our ancestors encountered a natural landscape or event outside of their day-to-day concerns, it nevertheless retained this quality of "being-for."

We should not accept the premise that "incorporeal object" is a coherent premise without argument. Sherlock Holmes is an abstract object. But the theists say that God is abstract object that exists outside the mind.

Nietzsche taught that people were not built to seek out truth, not the unwelcome truths at least. Rather they were built to seek out meaning for their lives. Thus, the logical appeal to atheism on the grounds of the evidence would not be effective, on the Nietzschean view. People would continue to cling to religion because it gives meaning to their lives. Thus, in order to combat Christianity, he argued, what was needed was a new religion, a new way to give meaning. But what should a philosopher care about being efficacious? If the vast majority of people are constitutionally incapable of being atheists, should we try to deceive them using rhetoric? No! We should simply state that perhaps the vast majority of people are constitutionally incapable of being atheists. We should state the truth, not try to change the world. 