Those sophomoric thinkers who populate our Philosophy departments love to denigrate Epicurus's famous doctrine of the swerve. But the essence of the doctrine is simply that the world doesn't behave according to laws. For whatever reason, be it cultural or innate, we must labor to imprint that doctrine on our minds. But really it should be those who propose such a metaphysical structure that should have to labor. A physical "law" is just a metaphor. What could constrain the motion of a particle, except another particle, or itself? What is this object that you are positing? Who inscribed the world with mathematics, for I'm sure you believe that there is some sort of mathematical beauty or symmetry to these laws? Is this just intelligent design theory through the back door. 

Get the most avowedly empiricist atheist thinker you can find (and make sure his blood sugar is okay) and you will still find that he believes in these laws. Because he wants to rule the universe, by proxy, by knowledge of its fundamental laws, and he cannot do this if it does not have fundamental laws.

But we must employ a slave to whisper in our ears at every dinner time: "There are no laws of nature." There are physico-mathematical models that can fit to a certain degree of precision onto certain physical systems. But that is it. As ever, do not reify the model, and do not seek to use it on a physical system do which it does not apply. 

G. E. Moore ushered (or should have ushered) in a new era of of philosophy with his refutation of idealism. And people are quick to accept the force of the argument (once they understand it) even if they do not fully embrace it. But even Moore could not accept the implications of his argument, and continued to believe in magic, albeit of a different sort - moral magic. Where is our contemporary Moore who has the courage to refute determinism in the same way: "I can raise this hand or I can raise this hand...both are in my power at this very moment." Any argument you marshall against this had better had some a priori convincing premises. And "mathematical models exactly describe the world" or "the world is uniform" certainly isn't one of them.