The central pillar of the Epicurean doctrine is the mortality of the soul. If one becomes convinced that bodily death is also the death of the soul, and not, as Plato and nearly all other doctrines would have it, the separation of the body and the soul, other Epicurean positions become much more plausible. If there is no afterlife in which we are to live cheek by jowl with the gods, we need not trouble ourselves with trying to impress them. They are clearly not interested in rewarding our behavior in this life. 

If the soul does not live on after death, then the purported existence of other foundations for moral value become less plausible. Why is doing our duty inherently good, if there is not some period during which we will be rewarded for it? Consider a world in which acting morally led to misery for everyone concerned, and in which there is no heaven in which the moral actions will be rewarded with beatitude. Would we still say that there is inherent value in acting morally? (How convenient it is, by the way, that acting morally actually increases the happiness of everyone concerned, in the aggregate!) 

The soul's mortality also strongly implies that the soul is a body, or at least a physical object, or property of a physical object. Unless we're to believe that it's a coincidence that our immaterial mind or soul expires at the same time as our body is hit by a dump truck or whatever. (Of course, dualist and idealist positions are riddled with this problem of coincidence for all kinds of everyday events. One trip to the pub after a seminar should have been enough to refute all dualism and idealism, as Hume hinted at. I drink a particular chemical, or imagine myself drinking a chemical as the idealist would have it, and this somehow throws my immaterial soul into a significantly different state!) Accepting the postulate of a bodily soul undermines the plausibility of various metaphysical and epistemological positions. Dualism and Idealism are right out, as they directly contradict the notion of a bodily soul. But indirect realism, as an epistemological position, is also less plausible from the physicalist-monist perspective. If my experiences just are bodily states caused by a physical interaction with an external object, in what sense is this not direct? Would the indirect realist really want to argue that we are not experiencing the object, but are rather experiencing our perception of the object, given that the perception is nothing but an experience caused by the object? The indirect realist would have it that we are experiencing an...experience, and not an object? (The confusion of 2nd order mental states and 1st order mental states is at the heart of indirect realism, but that's an argument for another day.)

We should examine well the arguments for the immortality of the soul, then, and see what merit they have. Plato's Phaedo would seem to be the first instance of actual arguments being advanced for the position. No Pythagorean argument for it survives, if any was made by them. But it is worth noting at the outset that Socrates, in the Phaedo, advances the position as a piece of folk wisdom, suggesting that neither Plato nor Pythagoras invented the notion of the immortality of the soul. Rather it was part of the folk religion of ancient Greece. And, indeed, no belief is more tempting than that we will live on after our deaths. I want to believe it myself. Our survival instinct is so strong that we imagine only with great pain a world in which we no longer exist. Thus we will leap at any argument for our own immortality, no matter how implausible or half-baked. Even the local elder asserting the existence of the afterlife, without argument, has been enough for the vast majority of people to believe it. Gullibility, not the lack of endeavor or creativity, is the greatest scourge to the pursuit of truth. Humans were not built to pursue truth, after all, as Nietzsche says. They were built to unify, to form communities. 

Of course, the central flaw in all the arguments for the immortality of the soul is there is not a single shred of evidence for it, almost by definition. If there is an afterlife, it seems to be a sort of trapdoor that does not allow 2-way traffic. On the other hand, there is a kind of intuitive evidence for it, which is that our mind or soul seems to be independent of our body, even while we are alive. In one case, when we dream we have a kind of purely mental experience, which is disconnected from our waking, embodied one. We no longer need to eat, in some cases we can even fly. The comparisons with the popular conception of heaven suggest themselves. In another case, when we turn our attention to thoughts, words, concepts, etc., we can become so absorbed in them that we lose touch with the physical world. The reflexive nature of human intelligence thus itself suggests that the human mind is distinct from the body. Plato made use of this intuitive evidence for the immortality of the soul right at the beginning of the Phaedo:

"SOCRATES: And indeed the soul reasons best when none of these senses troubles it, neither hearing nor sight, nor pain nor pleasure, but when it is most by itself, taking leave of the body and as far as possible having no contact or association with it in its search for reality.
SIMMIAS: That is so.
SOCRATES: At is is then that the soul of the philosopher most disdains the body, flees from it and seeks to be by itself?" (Phaedo, 65)

Socrates is here arguing that a philosopher should not fear death, since he has endeavored to live in death throughout the entirety of his life, meaning that he has attempted to use the rational component of his soul at all times, deriving all his pleasure through that, and not the appetitive or spirited parts. Socrates is here presupposing that death is the separation of the soul from the body. Nevertheless, it is fitting that Plato begins the Phaedo this way, since it implicitly suggests that the act of philosophizing itself supports the idea that soul can exist without the body.

From an Epicurean point of view, Socrates's view appears to have the correct premises, but to draw incorrect conclusions from them. It is true that the best theorizing comes when we can maintain total focus on abstract concepts. This is why we go away by ourselves into a quiet study, after everyone has gone to sleep, to do our philosophizing. Like Montaigne did in reality, we metaphorically build ourselves a tower filled with books in which to think and write by candlelight. But this does not imply that we should "despise" bodily pleasures (Phaedo, 64). Rather, it means that we should attend to them carefully. We should go to sleep early, eat a healthy breakfast, exercise, get fresh air, satisfy all of our bodies needs so that we will feel no hunger or pain, and so that our circulation will be strong, and our mind sharp, so that we can do our best thinking. We do not philosophize best by ignoring our bodily needs, rather, we philosophize best by having the luxury to satisfy all of our bodily needs in some portion of the day so that we can devote the remaining portion to study. Socrates does not scorn pleasure, rather he scorns the more basic pleasures of eating, drinking, having sex, etc. But only so that he can maximize the pleasure he derives from philosophy. This is all in agreement with the Epicurean view. We should maximize the higher pleasures, as they are more satisfying and longer lasting, than the basic ones. But we should not have scorn for the basic ones. That is nothing but posturing. We should here interject a minor chastisement of Diogenes Laertius (or whatever later Epicurean source he used) for suggesting that Epicurus was somehow able to continue doing philosophy whilst dying of kidney stones. Rubbish. As Aristotle pointed out, philosophy requires the luxury of not having to do manual labor to support oneself, and also the luxury of being able to free oneself from pain and privation. What this suggests, then, is rather the opposite of what Plato intends. It suggests that the mind is very much part of the body. All the bodily effort needed to maintain a philosopher, not just from himself but also the laborers on which he depends, suggests that philosophizing is a very energy-intensive, unstable, physical activity, and not the soul's natural state. 

It is also poignant that Socrates did grasp that the source of pleasure was the body. The pleasure he derived from philosophy was the sense of his own power increasing, his increasing adaptiveness to his environment, and his metaphorical defeat of his sparring opponents. In the afterlife, his philosophizing would be empty and devoid of pleasure. He would either know everything already, or have no need to know anything. His sparring partners would have no ego to bruise, and so he would derive no pleasure from besting them in a debate. His desire to be free of his body, which Freud would later call the "Death Drive," is a desire to become a sort of zombie, or an artificial intelligence, a font of pure knowledge and activity but without any color or life. (I would suggest that Plato recognizes this fact, and that is why he has Socrates have his last words suggest that he is sick. Socrates means that life is a kind of sickness, but Plato, I would suggest, means that Socrates himself was not entirely healthy. But that's an argument for another day.)

Let us turn now to the actual arguments for the immortality of the soul in the Phaedo. The first begins on p.70. It is quite flimsy, even by the standard of arguments for the immortality of the soul. We might write it out explicitly like this:

(1) Whenever something becomes some property X, it must have started out as the opposite property Y.
(2) Being alive and being dead are opposite properties.
(3) Whenever something becomes alive, it must have started out dead.
(4) Therefore, our soul exists in a dead state before we are born, at which point it becomes alive.

I'm willing to grant that premises (1) through (3) are true. They seem to be true analytically based on the definition of "opposite" and "becoming." We need to understand opposite as meaning just not-X, rather than assuming that every property has some unique property which is its opposite. I can become a redhead, but what is the opposite of a redhead? We cannot say, but we can say that if "I became a redhead" is true, then the meaning of "became" guarantees that whatever color my hair was before, it was not red. However, the meanings of the words "alive" and "dead" seem to function in a way that is conducive to Socrates's argument. Anything that does not have the property "alive," we term "dead." (Although perhaps viruses exist somewhere in middle; it is immaterial for our purposes.) 

The problem with Socrates's argument is that the conclusion does not follow from the premises. My body starts out dead in the sense that my mother ingests dead, nutritive matter, which is then transformed into my living body before I am born. But this does not at all entail that I have a soul, or that my soul exists in the Underworld, or that the soul can exist without the body. Indeed, it rather suggests the opposite, since "a soul existing in a dead state" sounds a lot like a "soul alive in the Underworld." A truly dead soul would seemingly have no perceptions, thoughts, etc. If I make a table out of wood, it is not plausible to say that the table existed in a not-table state before I created the table. Rather, I created the table out of the wood. Just so, it seems more in keeping with Socrates's argument to imagine that God creates the soul ex-nihilo at the moment of our birth.

The second argument for the immortality of the soul begins on p.73 of the Phaedo. It depends on Socrates's theory that knowledge is recollection, presented in more detail in Plato's Meno. Here, instead of using mathematical truths, Socrates argues directly from knowledge of the Forms. He argues that we possess inherent knowledge of the form of Equality. Whenever we see two objects that are approximately equal (his example is two sticks of equal length), they partake of the Form of Equality. But they are not exactly equal. And we notice that, in the everyday world, no two objects are exactly equal. But then where do we get the notion of Equality itself? If the senses do not provide any example of objects that are exactly equal, how could we possess a concept of equality itself. We must have been directly acquainted with the Form of Equality in a prior state of our soul, i.e., when we were in the Underworld, which lingers on unconsciously once we are born into a body again. We might write out the argument explicitly like this:

(1) Humans possess knowledge of the Forms.
(2) Knowledge of the Forms cannot come from sense experience.
(3) Humans must have a source of knowledge that is not sense experience.
(4) The only source of knowledge that could provide knowledge of the Forms, apart from sense experience, is direct acquaintance with the Forms in another realm of existence.
(5) Therefore, humans have been directly acquainted with the Forms in another realm of existence.

This time, several of the premises seem dubious. With (1), Plato wants us to grant the existence of the Forms, i.e. abstract objects that really exist, but that somehow transcend the everyday world. This is controversial, to say the least. Moreover, it might be that, upon reflection, the notion of "existence that transcends the everyday world" may turn out to be incoherent. But let us grant, for a moment, that even Forms as abstract objects present a kind of epistemological problem. We might substitute in for "Forms" "synthetic a priori truths" to serve as a more convincing presentation of a genuine philosophical problem to be solved. And, indeed, it seems hard to ignore the parallels with Kant's argument for transcendental idealism here. 

Premise (2) also seems dubious. How, we might ask, can we see that two sticks are of equal length in the first place? Are we not somehow perceiving the equality of the sticks? It is only when Socrates heightens the definition of "equality" that premise (2) begins to seem plausible. For our everyday purposes, two sticks are equal. But along comes Socrates, who says, "no, I don't mean approximately equal, or even equal in length, I mean equal in every single way. Have you ever seen two sticks like that?" And we are forced to say, "no" (although I'm not sure that's the real definition of "equality," we might mutter under our breaths, seeing as it appears to be a useless concept, since it has no instantiations on Earth.) "Well then," Socrates continues, "you couldn't have come up with that concept using sense experience only." Let us again grant this premise for the moment.

Premise (3) is just a restatement of premises (1) and (2). Premise (4), then, is the one that is clearly false. One the one hand, the notion of "direct acquaintance with a Form" is an empty concept. It seems to derive from fables in which persons come face to face with a God. And this in turn might derive from the experience of meeting a person. In this case, it would rather be a subspecies of sense experience. When I reflect on the concept of "direct acquaintance with the Forms," I have to admit that I imagine some sort of mystical floating object and myself next to it, looking at it. Or the concept might derive from "Eureka" moments during which we suddenly understand something. In any case, premise (4) ignores human's capability for abstract thought. As Epicurus reminds us in a different context, sense perception has a receptive component and an active component. External objects impinge on our senses, but we also have an internal thought process that overlays a conceptual structure on our experience of the external objects. This is how optical illusions and other sensory errors occur. When we look at a square tower from far way, we overlay the concept of "round tower" on it, even though the tower is square and appears so once we get closer. Notice that this already provides a means of arriving at the concept of "total equality." We perceive two sticks as equal in size, and, from a distance, we might perceive them as equal in color. Upon closer reflection, we see that the two sticks are not actually equal in color. We can still retain the concept of "equality in color" and postulate the concept to other objects. We can also concatenate the concepts of equality in size, equality in color, etc. into the concept of "total equality," and postulate that of two objects. We can also imagine two sticks that are exactly alike and then postulate that the notion of total equality is instantiated by them (unless we've being reading Leibniz, and start to think that spatial position is also a relevant property, in which case we'll be thwarted again. But, again, perhaps we're beginning to conflate the concepts of "identity" and "equality"). In any case, humans possess a positive power of abstract reasoning that allows them to generate concepts that are not instantiated in nature. Thus, we do not need to be directly acquainted with the Form of Equality to arrive at the concept of "total equality." We can generate it ourselves through mental processes alone. 

We might wonder whether this same rebuttal applies to Kant's worries about the existence of synthetic a priori propositions. Yes, it does. Kant makes an analogous fallacious conclusion, when he suggests that a proposition's being a priori means that it's justification cannot come from the everyday world. But this is just not true. The quality of being a priori just means that the proposition's justification does not depend on any particular state of affairs, not that its justification transcends the everyday world. 2 + 2 = 4 is a priori not because it is not justified by these two apples being put together with these two apples yields four apples. It is justified by that state of affairs. But it does not depend on that state of affairs alone for its justification. It depends upon all the instances in which 2 things added to 2 things has yielded 4 things. As Mill remarked, humans, again through positive abstract reasoning, have grasped that the particularity of the case is not relevant, and that two of anything being added to two of anything will yield four of anything. But this does not imply that the human mind somehow (pace to all the Kant scholars, but it seems to be a purely magical process) imposes the concept of addition onto the world, anymore than it implies that we have been acquainted with the Form of Addition in the Underworld.  

The same sort of confusion between abstract objects and transcendental objects can, of course, be seen in the very idea of the Forms. The Pythagoreans, upon discovering that numbers could be applied in all sorts of different spheres, in geometry as well as music, for instance, wrongly deduced that this implied that numbers had some sort of special, higher existence. When they should rather have deduced numbers provide a useful model by which to understand certain natural phenomena. Socrates, too, upon finding that concepts like Beauty or Goodness cannot be exactly defined, but rather always admit of counterexamples and more and more strict redefinitions, wrongly deduced that this implied that these concepts had some sort of special, higher existence. When he should rather have deduced that concepts are purely mental phenomena, which do not have any strict correspondence with the physical world.

But we have become sidetracked. Let us continue on to Socrates's next argument. It begins on p. 78 of the Phaedo. We might precis it as:

(1) Changeable things are destructible, whereas unchangeable things are indestructible.
(2) The soul is unchangeable.
(3) Therefore, the soul is indestructible.

Here, Socrates seems to appeal to a quasi-Atomist line of thinking. Composite things, which are made up of several parts, can both be changed when those parts change their internal relations among themselves, and they can be destroyed when the composite parts are separated from one another. But something must remain stable throughout the change. These are the simple, basic substances, that are the ultimate constituent of all composite objects. This line of argument, which ultimately derives from Parminides's arguments about the impossibility of change, led the Atomists (and later the Epicureans) to posit the idea of atoms. Socrates does not postulate that there must be simple, unchanging, physical components. But he does utilize the idea that change implies a composite nature. Let us grant premise (1). This seems to be compatible with an atomist-Epicureanism. We might dispute whether the atoms are really unchangeable. They change their speed and position, after all. But perhaps they do not change their essential properties, their shape and size and reactivity with other atoms, we might think. The premise that is clearly false is premise (2). The soul is always in a state of change. It senses new objects, it desires new activities, it obtains new knowledge and wisdom. Indeed, Socrates's admonishment later on in this same section of the Phaedo that we should seek to purify the soul (even going as far as to espouse a sort of Pythagorean-Buddhist idea that impure souls are reincarnated as animals, and only pure souls are allowed to enter Hades) depends upon the idea that the soul is changeable. On the theoretical level, Socrates espouses the idea of a static, incorporeal, perfect soul. But on the practical level, he wants to urge us to shape ourselves, to purify our souls and achieve perfection. He may be the first, but is certainly not the last philosopher, to have contradictions between his theoretical and his practical points of view.

Socrates may be gesturing toward a genuine mystery, namely the problem of personal identity. How can I be said to be the same person, for example, five years apart when all of my desires, perceptions, etc. are different? But this problem would apply to inanimate objects as well. Consider Descartes's famous example of the wax. When wax melts, all of its properties change, yet it is still the same wax. How is this possible? Indeed, the very notion of "change" presupposes that it is one and the same object both before and after the change. The problem of personal identity collapses into a problem of identity simpliciter (which is fitting since, after all, the soul is nothing other than a body). Perhaps the problem is in our assumption that a "thing" is identical to a "set of properties," but that's a subject for another discussion. In any case, we see that there is nothing special about the soul's changeability viz a viz its ability to persist across changes of properties. 

Socrates's argument here seems to boil down to the idea that the soul is more like a Form than it is like a body. There is an inherent plausibility to this claim. It arises, as we've already discussed, because we can imagine ourselves to exist without a body. When we daydream, perform abstract reasoning, lose ourselves in thought, we lose contact with hunger, proprioception, and other desires and bodily experiences that remind us of our body. And when we dream, we experience a life quite apart from our body. (In fact, in both cases, we are actually experiencing what life as a "brain in a vat," a life of a pure prefrontal cortex would be like. But sense the prefrontal cortex doesn't have nerve endings, it seems like a bodiless life.) Just so, we can conceptualize "equality" without any reference to particular bodies. Thus our soul does seem more Form-like than body-like. But this makes Socrates's argument depends upon the premise that incorporeal Forms exist. First we would have to establish that this is even a coherent statement, which may be difficult. I can understand it as a metaphor, but there may be some problems with the coherence of the concept of pure Goodness, for example. But then, even if we grant that a genuine proposition is being expressed, we have to believe that it is actually true, based on zero evidence and on argumentation alone. A refutation along the lines of G. E. Moore's refutation of idealism would seem to rear its head here. "What's more likely, that this chair doesn't really exist, but is only an imperfect projection of the Form of the chair, or that the chair does exist, solidly, and that Plato has reified a concept? (Indeed, he reified the concept so thoroughly that he de-reified the perceptual world.)"

Socrates next responds to the objection that the soul is like a harmony within the body. Even though it may be more beautiful and metaphysically more significant than that the body, it is more fragile and thus it vanishes when the body is disrupted too much. For the Epicurean, this is a particularly significant objection, because it sounds like an apt metaphor for the Epicurean soul. Socrates's first rebuttal is that the soul cannot be a harmony because the soul retains knowledge from before it was born, whereas a harmony depends for its existence upon its component parts. In other words, he defaults back to his earlier argument that knowledge is a recollection, which we discussed above. His next response, which begins on p.93, might look like:

(1) The state of a harmony is dependent upon the state of its underlying parts (i.e., the instruments playing the notes).
(2) The state of the soul is not dependent upon the state of its underlying parts (i.e. the body).
(3) Therefore, the soul is not a harmony.

Here the idea is that it is the instruments and the particular manner in which they are played that determines the nature of the music produced. The instruments are the causal agents that produce the music. In the human body and soul, however, the soul is a causal agent that can act on the body. I can, just by willing it, cause my body to get up and walk around. Even if the body presents me with some strong craving (to eat sugar, for example) I can resist the urge using pure willpower. Therefore, the argument goes, it doesn't make sense to say that the body is the metaphysically basic object, since the body can be ruled by the soul. This clearly raises the issue of the freedom of the will, although Socrates does not discuss that directly. One way out of the argument is therefore to deny premise (2) and to deny that the soul does possess the power to rule the body. This is the tack taken by the Stoics, and many contemporary physicalists. However, an Epicurean would want to retain premise (2) because we want to retain the idea of free will. We thus have to take a different tack, as follows. We just need to accept the argument: both the premises and the conclusion. When I said that the notion of a harmony is an apt metaphor for the Epicurean soul, I did not thereby commit myself to the idea that the soul is like a harmony in all respects. I can accept the idea that the soul is not a harmony, without thereby accepting that the soul is immortal. Consider the following restatement of this argument:

(1) The state of a harmony is dependent upon the state of its underlying parts (i.e., the instruments playing the notes).
(2) The state of the soul is not dependent upon the state of its underlying parts (i.e. the body).
(3) The soul is not a harmony.
(4) If the soul is not a harmony, then it is immortal.
(5) Therefore, the soul is immortal.

Clearly, when we write it out this way, we see that premise (4) is implausible. It would need argumentative support, at the very least, for me to entertain it. And Socrates does not provide any. We can therefore retain the idea that the soul is like a harmony in some respects, namely that it arises out of a special configuration of a body, it's a time-dependent process, it requires energy to sustain, if the underlying parts that create it are destroyed, then it is destroyed as well, etc. But we need not be committed to the idea that the soul shares all properties with a harmony. It's not a collection of sound waves, for example. 

On the other hand, although we can make quick work of this argument as a formal argument for the immortality of the soul, it does raise an interesting puzzle for Epicureans to solve about the nature of the soul and free will specifically. How can a conglomeration of particles start to move at its own behest? How can I resist my desires? How can I produce a random number, if asked to? Personally, I think the only satisfactory answer is that the human "soul," which is nothing other than an alive, healthy, an active human body, must possess emergent properties that do not obey the laws of physics that govern other inanimate pieces of matter. Contemporary physicalists will throw up there hands here and laugh and say, what? How does that even make sense? How can the laws of physics not apply universally? Ah, but now we see the secret Stoicism that lies at the heart of every contemporary physicalist. They love aesthetic unity more than they love evidence. And they still harbor the idea of the watchful Father Logos, keeping the Universe in line. I would ask them to explain how a soupy collection of amino acids can give rise to life. How can amino acids start to preserve themselves, acquire information from the outside world, locomote, etc.? Once you can give a satisfactory physicalist explanation for that, which only calls up laws of physics, I will be convinced. But until then, I will trust the only evidence I have available to me. But that's a discussion for another day.

Socrates's next argument also begins on p.93 (it is rather intermixed with the argument discussed above). This time, Socrates argues that the soul cannot be a harmony because harmony admits of degree, whereas being a soul is a binary function. We might write it out as:

(1) If the soul were a harmony, we could truly say that some persons have more of a soul than other persons.
(2) We cannot truly say that some persons have more of a soul than other persons.
(3) Therefore, the soul is not a harmony.

Socrates's support for premise (1) relies on another implicit argument that moral goodness is akin to harmony, and moral evil is akin to disharmony. This appears to draw on the ideas of Plato's Republic. If "having a soul" were a property that could be analyzed as "having a certain harmonious relation of bodily parts (or soul components)," this would imply that everyone has the same relation of bodily parts or soul components, since everyone is said to have a soul simpliciter, i.e., in the same way. It is dubious whether this implicit argument is even very plausible. We might say that people either have a head, or they do not, without being committed to the idea that everyone has exactly the same head. In other words, there might be a range of harmonious relations between body or soul components that could truly be said to constitute "having a soul." Some of this range might include the propensity to yield to appetites and emulous desires, and some of the range might include a propensity to stick to maxims that were created rationally in advance. Socrates's argument depends on the fact that we give an magnitude-based, aesthetic judgment of music, i.e., we say that some music is more harmonious than others, whereas we do not say that someone has more of a soul than others. (In fact, there is a figure of speech in English about hearty souls or great souls, as opposed to lesser souls, but let's ignore this for the sake of argument.) 

But, again, even if Socrates successfully convinces us that the soul is not a harmony, that should not trouble us, because we were not committed to the idea that the soul is literally a harmony. We were only committed to the idea that the soul is metaphorically a harmony. Our commitment is really to the idea that a healthy, functioning body and brain can possess all the necessary features to be called alive human persons, e.g. it could eat, move, talk, reproduce, etc. The postulation of an immaterial soul inhabiting such a body is not a necessary one, for the purposes of explanation. And I would argue that this point of view more accurately captures the evidence than the binary one that Socrates puts forward and which was later adopted by Christianity. Since personhood seems to admit of gradations that are difficult to capture using the binary model. Does a newborn baby, with no capacity for rational thought, possess a tripartite soul, including the rational component? What about a fetus that never comes to term? Does a person without a functioning brain, kept alive by machines, still possess their soul? What has happened when someone has stopped breathing and circulating blood, only to be restored by a machine after some time? These are difficult questions to answer for those who maintain the idea of an immaterial soul, but easy (or at least easier) for those who think the body is sufficient. There is an elitist element to this debate, held among relatively rich men, which ignores some of the darker components of human existence.

Socrates's next argument is quite lengthy. It is intended to respond to an objection that, although Socrates has demonstrated that the soul is superior to the body, and more heavenly and more durable, he has not demonstrated that it can never die. Although it may grant us many lives, there may be a point at which it 'wears out' and cannot grant us more lives. The argument begins in earnest on p.102 of the Phaedo and proceeds until p.107. Much of that is devoted to arguing that objects acquire properties by partaking in Forms, and that some properties are essential to the objects which partake in them. For example, the property of Oddness is essential to the abstract object '3.' Socrates's basic claim is thus that 'being alive' is an essential property of the soul, and therefore the soul is immortal. We might try to spell out the argument like this:

(1) A soul brings to life anything it occupies.
(2) Being alive is thus an essential property of the soul.
(3) An object can never acquire the opposite property of an essential property it possesses.
(4) Being dead is the opposite property to being alive.
(5) Therefore, the soul can never die.

An unnamed objector rightly points out that this argument contradicts the very first argument that Socrates had presented, namely that every property must come from its opposite. Socrates's response to this objection is short and unsatisfying. Indeed, it may give us pause that the concept of a soul has thus generated two contradictory concepts. On the one hand, it must be, in a sense, dead when it exists in the Underworld, for it does not then occupy a body. On the other hand, it must be alive because it is a life-giving principle. (According to premise (1), does it not bring life to the Underworld? How can the soul occupy a space without occupying a body? It's quite mysterious.) But let us set aside this objection.

The problem with Socrates's argument is that, even if we grant that the soul is an immaterial object that is essentially alive, he has not shown that the soul cannot be destroyed, but rather that it cannot be killed. Suppose that "being watertight" were an essential property of a water bottle. I cannot remove this property and maintain the water bottle. If I smash the object to pieces, I remove the property of "being watertight," but I also thereby destroy the bottle. What I am left with is not a water bottle, it's just a collection of plastic remnants. Similarly, the property of "thinking" might be essential to the object me. You cannot cause me to stop thinking without destroying me. It is incoherent to assume that you have a me that is not thinking. But does this show that I am immortal? No, it only shows that I am fundamentally a thinking thing. Just so, we might grant that a soul is essentially a living thing. We cannot have a dead soul. The notion is incoherent like a water bottle that doesn't hold water, a round square, an even number '3,' and so on. But does that show that a soul must always exist? No, it only shows that when the object that we are calling a soul acquires the property 'dead' it ceases to be a soul. It is only a soul remnant, we might say.

Socrates makes some attempts to shore up the argument in the face of this objection. But his rebuttal (p.106) is unpersuasive.  Plato writes: "But, someone might say, what prevents the odd, while not becoming even as has been agreed, from being destroyed, and the even to come to be instead? We could not maintain against the man who said this that it is not destroyed, for the uneven is not indestructible." In other words, he agrees that, because oddness is an essential property of 3 apples, adding a 4th apple to the pile and introducing evenness destroys the 3 apples and replaces it with 4. Why does not that happen when the person dies? Why is not the soul, which is essentially alive, destroyed and replaced with a "soul remnant"? Socrates's answer is that being deathless is the same being indestructible. "All would agree, said Socrates, that the god, and Form of life itself, and anything that is deathless, are never destroyed. -- All men would agree, by Zeus, to that, and the gods, I imagine, even more so. But this makes his argument rather question-begging. If we start out by assuming that anything alive is indestructible, we need not bother arguing for the immortality of the soul. We have already assumed it. 

From the Epicurean point of view, the concept 'soul' is just a shorthand for a living body. We can grant, therefore, that a soul is essentially alive (without of course granting that it "brings life to whatever it inhabits," because it -- analytically -- cannot exist outside of a body). But at the same time, we can grant that souls are mortal. Once the body stops living, the soul vanishes.

Socrates concludes that "it is right to think then, gentlemen, that if the soul is immortal, it requires our care not only for the time we call our life, but for the sake of all time, and that one is in terrible danger if one does not give it that care." How much human spirit has been wasted in pursuit of the care that Socrates describes! Which could have been spent in actually improving our lot in life. And therein lies the essence of the Epicurean position: there is no other life. There is no point fasting and depriving yourself and wasting away celibate now, for this is your only chance. Worse yet giving your money and effort to the priests and cult leaders that promise something in the hereafter whilst profiting and enjoying the fat from your bones in the meantime.

Aristotle simply contradicted himself in the De Anima, writing on the one hand that every substantial form requires a body, and then that 

And in fact thought (νοῦς), as we have described it, is what it is by virtue of becoming (γίνεσθαι) all things, while there is another which is what it is by virtue of making (ποιεῖν) all things: this is a sort of positive state like the light; for in a sense light makes (ποιεῖ) potential colours into actual colours. Thought in this sense of it is separated (χωριστός), impassible (ἀ παθής), unmixed (ἀ μιγής), since it is in its essential nature activity (for always the active is superior to the passive factor, the originating force to the matter). Actual knowledge is identical with its object: in the individual, potential knowledge is in time prior to actual knowledge, but absolutely it is not prior even in time. It does not sometimes think (νοεῖ) and sometimes not think (οὐ νοεῖ). When separated (χωρισθεìς) it is alone just what it is, and this alone is immortal (ἀ θάνατον) and eternal (ἀ ΐδιον) (we do not remember because, while this is impassible (ἀ παθές), passive thought (παθητικòς νοῦς) is perishable); and without this nothing thinks (νοεῖ). (de An. III.5.430a14-26; transl. Smith/Barnes with modifications by R.F.).

He may be leaning on either a Platonic or a Stoic theory of the immortality of the soul here. How embarrassing that he did not have the strength to trust to his hylomorphism, even in the face of popular religion, etc. Or perhaps he himself was convinced of his own immortality, for the reasons which we have discussed above. [On further reflection, Aristotle just seems to be referring to thought here, not to the intellectual component of the soul. This may be Pomponazzi's contention against Averroes, who argues for a "universal" intellectual soul. To continue this essay, I could continue to try to find historical arguments for the immortality of the soul, for example in Aquinas (Q.D. de Anima a.14 and in Ia, 75, 2 and 6) or Albert the Great. Or Augustine's "De immortalitate animae." Or Moses Mendelssoh's "Phaedo, or On the Immortality of the Soul." Or I could try to find more contemporary ones. https://philpapers.org/browse/afterlife seems to have some leads.]

