Once one either becomes too sophisticated to place much credence in arguments for the existence of the soul, or embraces the philosophical Protestantism of Kant such that the existence of soul is no longer an appropriate philosophical question, one becomes interested in the mind-body problem. As David Chalmers puts it, despite the great scientific advances in the understanding of the human body and brain, "it still seems utterly mysterious that the causation of behavior should be accompanied by a subjective inner life" (Chalmers, The Conscious Mind, xi) Instead of the existence of a super-added entity -- the soul -- seeming necessary to explain self-motion, desire, cognition, and other features of living organisms, the mind-body postulates a super-added dimension, or plane of existence, or some I-know-not-what in order to account for the fact of human experience. Again, Chalmers writes:

	We have good reason to believe that consciousness arises from physical systems such as brains, but we have little idea how it arises, or why it exists at all. How could a physical system such as a brain also be an experiencer? Why should there be something it is like to be such a system? Present-day scientific theories hardly touch the really difficult questions about consciousness. We do not just lack a detailed theory; we are entirely in the dark about how consciousness fits in the natural order. (Chalmers, The Conscious Mind, xi)

I'm going to argue that the existence of the mind-body problem depends upon fallacious reasoning, and that this reasoning depends for its plausibility on the fact that we are the objects of the argument, i.e., that we possess self-consciousness, and on the same fact that lends plausibility to the arguments for the existence of the soul: that our experience of thought is not accompanied by a bodily sensation. The fundamental problem is that we can imagine (or at least we think we can imagine) mental phenomena without reference to physical objects, because our experience of mental phenomena is just experience of brain states, and the brain doesn't have any nerves.

Our starting point should be to inquire why it is that someone who is quite ready to reject Cartesian dualism as insupportable is nonetheless unsatisfied with the proposition that consciousness in not physical. To manufacture a philosophical problem is actually the easiest thing in the world. One must only ask, of one of the features of some physical object, why the object has that feature or how the object has that feature. If that feature turns out to be a non-obvious essential feature, a philosophical problem will be created. Thus, I might ask "how do electrons have charge?" or "why do electrons have charge?" I might go on to say "we have good reason to believe that charge arises from physical systems such as electrons, but we have little idea how it arises, or why it exists at all." These questions seem to be overly demanding. Perhaps one might argue that we will eventually have an answer to the how question, once we sufficiently understand the composition of electrons in terms of their more basic constituents, or their interaction with a physical field, etc. That would be about as edifying as the explanation that electrons are massive because they contain graviton particles, or bend space-time. It would simply push the question on to a different physical object. But consider the how question with respect to consciousness. We have little idea how consciousness arises from the physical structure of our brain, Chalmers says. We have a little? I would love to hear the little. "How could a physical system such as a brain also be an experiencer?" We must consider whether there is any possible explanation that would satisfy this question. Try to imagine one. I would remind you that it is not even possible to give an exact equation for the quantum mechanical wave-function of a single, isolated carbon atom. One can only give a numerical approximation. And this is a mathematical limitation, not a technological or intellectual limitation. How much more absurd it is, then, to imagine explaining the interaction of billions of neurons in such a fashion that consciousness (and self-consciousness) pops out. It makes me laugh when I read Chalmers's hopes for a future theory of consciousness:

	I am an optimist about consciousness: I think that we will eventually have a theory of it, and in this book I look for one. But consciousness is not just business as usual; if we are to make progress, the first thing we must do is face up to the things that make the problem so difficult. Then we can move forward toward a theory, without blinkers and with a good idea of the task at hand. (Chalmers, The Conscious Mind, xi)

I do not mean to pick on Chalmers specifically, especially as this was a young, go-get-'em Chalmers, bright eyed and bushy tailed. He is merely a stand-in for all the young analytic philosophers out there that make contemporary philosophical literature so unbearable. But there is so much to unpack here. The sad illusion that analytic philosophers have that what they do is any way comparable to the work of natural scientists. Chalmers thinks that he begins a "theory" of consciousness with this book. If by theory, he just means some words about the topic, then fine, but why use such a grandiose word? (Plato made the initial mistake when he thought that "giving an account" of a word had some sort of metaphysical significance. Once we've given an account of something, then we really understand it, then we have reduced it to its elements, then we have overcome it. Analytic philosophers, seeing that Aristotelianism had been disproved, and that retaining the Platonic-Christian theology in one's philosophical system had led to Kant and afterward to German idealism, said to themselves: hmm, how about the early Plato? How about we simply run around giving "accounts" of things, without any coherent world-view. Despite the fact the Plato had already run up against irreducibility of concepts to other concepts, this endeavor will at least keep us busy and employed in perpetuity. But look at science. It's really great and everyone respects it. Let's call our accounts "theories" therefore. That will give us some much-needed authority.) Certain changes in the physical condition of the brain can predictably cause a change in consciousness, but consciousness is not reducible to the physical condition of the brain. I'm not sure that counts as a theory. It's a proposition, certainly. Finally, towards the end of the book, Chalmers admits that he does not have a theory, or part of a theory, he has a "prototheory." In other words, he has some philosophical propositions about mind-body interaction. That's fine, that's what you should be doing. But don't pretend to have the equivalent of Newtonian mechanics with respect to the mind-body problem. The philosophy is enough. 

The reason the illusion of a theory is important, though, and why Chalmers leaves it to the end to dispel the illusion, is that the plausibility of the existence of a mind-body problem depends upon our believing in some sort of explanatory gap. We have to believe that there is something strange about our inability to give a physical (i.e., using physics) explanation of consciousness. "We can give a physical explanation for everything else," Chalmers would have us believe, "but this consciousness thing is just stumping us." Again, we cannot even give a physical description of a single carbon atom. The best we can do is a picture with some blobs around it representing the position wavefunctions of the electrons. So, it's not at all surprising that we cannot give a physical description of the interactions of billions of neurons.

But perhaps I'm setting up a straw man here. Perhaps mind-body problem advocates are not insisting on a physical explanation of consciousness. Perhaps a psychological one would suffice. Psychology counts as a natural science, right? And this is more in line with the prototheory that Chalmers delivers. For example, one axiom in the prototheory is that consciousness arises whenever enough mental resources are devoted to a single object. Chalmers borrows Daniel Dennett's slogan that "consciousness is a cerebral celebrity, nothing more and nothing less." In other words, the brain may be processing thousands of different pieces of information at a given time, but say that one is using up the majority of the synapse-fires. That one is what we call "consciousness." It's an interesting idea. I'm not sure it really captures what we mean by consciousness, taken to include self-consciousness, one's sense of self persisting through time, i.e., everything that was traditionally explained via a soul. But Dennett was pushing his California-Buddhist "the self is an illusion" bullshit at this point. But Chalmber's embracing of this idea actually militates his earlier claim that there is anything mysterious about consciousness. "How could a physical system such as a brain also be an experiencer?" Well, David, if enough synapses fire corresponding to the same apple, the conscious experience of an apple is created. Now, at the end of the book, you can accept that explanation? At the beginning, you made it seem like you'd only accept an explanation that explains "how" the experience is created. It's created in the same way that the apple is created by jamming together enough carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen atoms, i.e., through token-token identity. The existence of any object is mysterious, when you demand an explanation of "how" a macroscopic object arises from the conglomeration of fundamental particles. There's no reason to posit a separate metaphysical plane of existence with respect to consciousness. 

Let's examine some of the specific arguments that Chalmers gives against the reducibility of conscious experience to physical objects pushing each other around, etc. The first argument he calls "The logical possibility of zombies." It's not really an argument, it's just a statement of the conclusion:

	(1) It is logically possible for a physically identical copy of oneself to exist, but for it to lack conscious experience.
	(2) If (1) is true, then facts about conscious experience are not identical to facts about physical constitutions.
	(3) Therefore, facts about conscious experience are not identical to facts about physical constitutions.

The idea here is that the zombie can walk, go to work, talk to people, etc., all with the same effectiveness as oneself. All the while, however, it has no stream of consciousness. There is nothing there experiencing any of these activities. It is reminiscent of the classic Star Trek: The Next Generation episode "The Measure of Man," in which Riker argues that Data is just a very complicated automaton (with no conscious experience). There is no other premise to argue against other than (1). Chalmers's support for it is that "I confess that the logical possibility of zombies seems...obvious to me." Chalmers then claims that it is up to me to argue that this situation is logical impossible. Very well. "Conscious experience" is nothing but a name that is given to a particular sort of bio-physical reaction that occurs in my body while I am alive and awake and conscious. Thus, it is incoherent to claim that the bio-physical reaction can be occurring without conscious experience occurring, since the two items are identical. Chalmers might object that the concept of conscious experience does not include anything related to bio-physical reactions, and he is limiting himself to a prior relationships between concepts. But the concept of conscious experience DOES include bio-physical items, because the concept is some abstraction based upon my seeing, tasting, remember, willing things, etc. And I am a bio-physical object and all of the above have to do with my interaction with other physical objects. It does not explicitly involve hormones, neurons, etc. Why not? Because I am the object having the experiences! It doesn't need to. Consider that Data was a mindless automaton. What would his conception of conscious experience be? Perhaps it would be all about the bio-physical objects, reactions, structures, etc. that we have that he lacks. And he would want them! He might even be tempted to...eat our brains in the attempt to acquire them.

Another irony into which Chalmers's position falls is that zombies, or something quite close to them, exist in the actual world. Namely, persons who imbibe too much alcohol, or some combination of drugs, or who sleepwalk excessively. They are persons who still receive and process stimuli from the external world, walk, talk, etc., yet their stream of consciousness is absent. At first glance, this might seem to support Chalmers's position. It certainly lends plausibility to his thought-experiment of the zombie world. After all, many of us have first-hand or second-hand experience of a zombie. However, the key difference with these real-life zombies is that there is a literal physical problem with their brains that causes them to arise! In the case of the blackout drunk, the brain is literally riddled with alcohol in order to make this situation arise. How strange Chalmers must believe the world to be that something supraphysical (supernatural?) can be suspended by the presence of a particular chemical in one's brain. Wouldn't it be much simpler to just accept that the human brain, the most complicated system in the universe after all, might be able to generate a stream of consciousness by itself?

The concept of a tree is inherently physical. We cannot imagine a tree without also imagining some stuff out of which it is composed. Is the concept of stream-of-consciousness inherently physical? Yes, because we cannot imagine a stream of consciousness without imagining photons and sound waves and electro-neural signals impinging upon it. Chalmers is confused because, for example, when we dream, we appear to have stream-of-consciousness without any physical things impinging upon it. Or, when we daydream, or think about abstract mathematical concepts, we seem to have stream-of-consciousness without any physical things impinging upon it. But this is only because our point-of-view is lodged within the frontal cortex of the brain, where there are no nerves. If we could feel the synapses firing and the hormones swirling around, etc., our concept of thought as a non-physical entity would evaporate in an instant.

Is there not also a latent Platonic-Christian idea of the superiority of the rational soul at work here? The automaton can do everything that we can but it still lacks something? A something which is not reducible to anything physical? There are facts about the world that are not reducible to physical facts? O, how subtle and nefarious Plato and Paul are! Even liberal atheist professors at UC Santa Cruz can still be under their spell, despite their best efforts to liberate and liberalize themselves. 

Chalmers's next argument is what he calls the "Argument from the inverted spectrum." It might be summarized as follows:

	(1) It is logically possible that a person's physical constitution could be the same (or relevantly similar, it need not be identical) as another's, and yet their color experiences could be inverted, i.e. one person's red would be the other's blue, etc.
	(2) If (1) is true, then facts about conscious experience are not identical to facts about physical constitutions.
	(3) Therefore, facts about conscious experience are not identical to facts about physical constitutions.

Again, the entire argument is really contained in premise (1). He writes that "It is therefore enough to note that one can coherently imagine a physically identical world in which conscious experiences are inverted, or (at the local level) imagine a being physically identical to me but with inverted conscious experiences." I would note that this argument is question-begging, because it is only coherent to imagine this situation if we already assume that physical facts do not completely determine stream-of-consciousness facts. If, on the other hand, we are committed to the idea that our experience of red JUST IS the interaction between the object, the light, our eyes, and our brains, then we cannot coherently imagine this world. 

We should again, though, ask where the prima facie plausibility of premise (1) arises from. Because the argument is not offensively question-begging, and Chalmers is not the only one who finds the argument plausible. There must be some reason why we THINK we can coherently imagine this inverted spectrum world. One reason seems to be that we have experience of other people experiencing things differently. One person might see a certain shade of teal as closer to blue, while another sees it closer to green. One person may find a cake to be too sickly sweet, while another finds it to be just right. Because we are social animals, we empathize with the other person to such a degree that it causes our experiences to float free of the objects from which they arise. But because we are identified with our body to such a degree, we do not consider the possibility that the experience is determined FOR US by the constitution of our bodies. Because we have never experienced living in another body, we do not focus on the ways in which our own body determines our experience. We assume that other people are little copies of our own soul that merely inhabit another body, and that the separation is between the world and the experience, not between one body and another.

Color blind animals.