The dream is to amass a pile of knowledge so high that we may sit at the top, untroubled and out of reach.

Man has become too much an artistic creature, and he seeks to live his life as though he were in an art-from. An Epicurean maxim might therefore be the denial of Aristotle's maxim that "probable impossibilities should be preferred to improbable possibilities." This may be true in art, where the narrative logic should trump physical possibility or even logical possibility. But in life, probable possibilities are the best. If there are none, then improbable possibilities. Reject all impossibilities. Though the narrative flow of your life may suggest that you have an immortal soul, and that there is a beneficent deity that will take care of you, even after your death, these claims are physically impossible, and thus should be rejected.

Perhaps fiction itself is to blame for the Stoic world view of causal determinism. People became so accustomed to the idea of an authored universe, where every event has been foreshadowed and is the result of an overarching intention that they began to see the universe itself that way. It's difficult to see how one would arrive at the Leibnizian view that this is the best of all possible worlds using only the evidence of the real world. A layer of fictional ontology must always be between us and our experience of the real world if we are to find that view plausible.

If one could go back in time and teach Marcus Aurelius about the fallacy called "ignoratio elenchi through high redefinition," they could spare his readers, including myself, much torment in having to read over and over about the meaninglessness of our lives when considered from the standpoint of eternity, etc.

Perhaps space is not an existent thing but rather arises out of objects. Thus, the weaker gravitational attraction between two bodies is the primary existent, the apparently empty space between them only a different way of expressing the former. And perhaps time too has no independent existence. Rather, a raised object's attraction to the Earth is primary and the apparent passage of time as it falls is only a different way of expressing the lapse of time as it falls.

"The influence of Pomponazzi was strongly felt by Lucilius Vanini (1585-1619), who was strangled and burnt as a heretic at Toulouse. He was the author of an Amphitheatrum aeternae providentiae (1615) and of a De admirandis naturae reginae deaeque mortalium arcanis libri quator (1616). He seems to have embraced a kind of pantheism, though he was accused of atheism, which he was said to have dissembled in his first work." (Copleston, Volume III, pp.226-7)

"The closest thing is a preachy private letter written in 1429 in defence of Epicurus by humanist Cosma Raimondi (1400–35/6) to a friend. The Neoplatonist Marsilio Ficino (1433–99) in his youth wrote an essay On Pleasure, only to repudiate it, and a short commentary on Lucretius, which he condemned to the flames. He later confessed: I have always taken so much care not to spread any impious doctrine, that even my little commentaries on Lucretius, which I wrote – I do not know how – when I was still a boy, I did not save then; in fact I gave them to Vulcan." (https://antigonejournal.com/2023/05/lucretius-in-the-renaissance/)

"Lorenzo Valla (1406/7–57) also wrote a philosophical dialogue titled On Pleasure in his mid-twenties. The work articulates the Epicurean position – without once mentioning Lucretius – only to reject it in favour of a hedonistic Christianity."  (https://antigonejournal.com/2023/05/lucretius-in-the-renaissance/)

"Palpable traces of Lucretian influence on the Renaissance are limited to a few curious readers, and they are not without interest. Niccolò Machiavelli (1469–1527) is the best-known, and most sophisticated, Renaissance reader. The political philosopher, who copied, corrected and annotated his own manuscript of De Rerum Natura (now in the Vatican Library), may have developed his astringent political realism from the Lucretian vision of a godless universe." (https://antigonejournal.com/2023/05/lucretius-in-the-renaissance/)

"Luke Slattery is an Australian writer, editor and critic. His work has appeared in the New Yorker, LA Times, Times Literary Supplement, Philosophy Now, and the Spectator. He is the author of four books of non-fiction including Reclaiming Epicurus (Penguin, London, 2012) and a novel titled Mrs M (Fourth Estate, Sydney, 2017). He is working on a book about Pico Della Mirandola. A detailed account of the transmission of Lucretius from antiquity to the Renaissance is given in David Butterfield’s The Early Textual History of Lucretius’ De Rerum Natura (Cambridge UP, 2013); further details about Epicureanism in the 15th century may be found in Catherine Wilson’s Epicureanism at the Origins of Modernity (Oxford UP, 2009), Alison Brown’s The Return of Lucretius to Renaissance Florence (Harvard UP, Cambridge, MA), and Ada Palmer’s Lucretius in the Renaissance (Harvard UP, Cambridge, MA, 2014). My own book Reclaiming Epicurus (Penguin, London, 2012) offers a broader survey of Epicureanism, For those wanting something a little different, Karl Marx’s doctorate on Epicurus and Democritus may be read here https://marxists.architexturez.net/archive/marx/works/1841/dr-theses/ch02.htm." (https://antigonejournal.com/2023/05/lucretius-in-the-renaissance/)

Epicureanism is the Cartesian demon. The doubts were Descartes's own about his Christianity. Modern philosophy is a reaction against this demon.

Comparison between the truth of Epicureanism and Kato Kalen's knowledge of what was happening outside his trailer, as in the Gary Schandling joke.

The fundamental mistake of analytic philosophy is the same as that of the young Wittgenstein: to suppose that the world is composed out of facts or propositions. Attempting to break down concepts into their elemental components is a fool's errand, because concepts are vague, unstable, non-universal brain states that have a high (but not perfect) degree of overlap amongst people. Imagine then attempting to learn something about a semi-shared brain state by examining other brain states that overlap with it. We are learning something about how the neurons organize and form connections, but nothing about the world outside our heads.

The desire to retain incorporeal substances of some kind by philosophers (for without them, what would the purpose of philosophers be?) is so strong that they will readily accept such a flimsy argument against physicalism as: "Yes, but can you give be a rigorous account of what counts as physical and what doesn't?" As though any concept can be rigorously defined! Is this 400 B.C.? What we mean by physicalism: no forms, no souls, no gods, no states of affairs, no phenomena (in the Kantian sense), no laws of nature; in short, no magic!

How different the history of philosophy becomes once we realize that the truth was discovered through armchair reasoning 2,500 years ago. Before Socrates even. The history of philosophy then becomes a history of suppression of the truth. Partly for financial reasons and partly because humans are not psychologically disposed to the truth. 

Frege wanted to disprove naturalism about mathematics. Moore wanted to disprove naturalism about ethics (the naturalistic fallacy). This is likely a sublimated Christian urge. 

"The problem about existence is a little more complex. In a much-cited discussion of Russell's theory, P. F. Strawson argues that in saying ‘the present king of France is bald’ one is not stating that a present king of France exists, but presupposing or assuming that it does (‘On Referring’, Mind, 1950). This is shown by the fact that if someone uttered this sentence, his interlocutors are not likely to say, ‘that's false’, but instead, ‘there's no king of France at present’, thereby making the point that he had not in fact made a statement, that is, he had not succeeded in saying anything true or false." (VSI Bertrand Russell). This could be an illustration of the problems with Analytic philosophy.

An interesting paper topic could be a physicalist analysis of Russell's and Godel's paradox viz a viz why the meta element of both paradoxes is what leads to trouble. The brain's capacity for self-reflection is reflected in the paradoxes, perhaps?

Russell's indirect realism draws on Descartes's Meditations (placing individual sense experience as the only indubitable thing). But Russell failed to appreciate the purpose behind Descartes's maneuver. It was not to combat skepticism, as he claimed. It was to weaken belief about the external world, to strengthen belief in the mind qua immortal soul. Russell's attempts to formulate a perfect philosophical language similarly draws on Leibniz, but without realizing the intent behind Leibniz's maneuver, which was to render the physical world unnecessary for knowledge (and for life). Russell's attempt to use space as the medium by which sense-experience can be related to external objects - the latter are 'constructions' from sense-data, using they notion of space as a hypothesis - is Kantian through and through. "Russell describes as the ‘supreme maxim of scientific philosophising’ the principle that ‘wherever possible, logical constructions are to be substituted for inferred entities’" (VSI Bertrand Russell). But Russell did not understand Kant's reason for the 2nd Copernican Revolution, which was to save the noumenal soul from being captured by Newtonian physics. Russell thus unwittingly brings in Christian first principles into Analytic philosophy, which, like rats on a ship, are nigh-on-impossible to eradicate once they are present.

Descartes and Kant both utilize the same basic argumentative structure. (1) Raise the spectre of the skeptic in order to artificially raise the standards for knowledge to require focus to be placed on the mind and to eliminate the physical world as a viable source of knowledge (for how do you even know that the physical world exists?). (2) Posit an immaterial self that is capable of knowledge without recourse to physical interactions. Cartesian self-knowledge and mathematical knowledge. Kantian synthetic a priori knowledge. (3) Readmit the physical world now that an answer to the skeptic has been discovered, except that now the physical world is changed. In Descartes's case, we are required to accept a dualist world. In Kant's case, we are required to accept a transcendental-idealist world, in which space, time, and physics have been coopted by the noumenal soul. 

Epicureans and Atheists [Cambridge, 2015]

Gianluca Mori. Athéisme et dissimulation au XVIIe siècle: Guy Patin
et le “Theophrastus redivivus,” avant-propos par Antony McKenna.
Paris: Honoré Champion, 2020

In a letter from Patin to André Falconet from 27 August 1648,
Mori posits that in coded language, Patin referred to a meeting in
which he, Naudé, and Gassendi began work on a “summa de l’athéisme
qui en traite les aspects historiques, philosophiques, politiques, moraux
et son rappart à la science de la nature de l’homme, avec un grand
étalage d’érudition ancienne” (263, 265–68). This summa would ulti-
mately culminate in the Theophrastus redivivus. While Mori concedes
that Gassendi’s atheism is not fully conclusive, he notes that Guy Patin’s
correspondence indicates that he was convinced that the professions
of Catholic orthodoxy by the famous Epicurean atomist were not to
be taken seriously (267). Nevertheless, it was likely Naudé who initi-
ated the project as a way of committing to writing a secret manuscript
capable of preserving and elaborating arguments for atheism among
heterodox free-thinking authors. Naudé concocted the plan after at-
taining several unpublished manuscripts from Capanella and relocating
to Paris during which, after 1627, his zeal for obtaining obscure and
prohibited manuscripts was “deviant obsessionelle” (269). Naudé,
in turn, spoke with Gassendi, exhorting the latter to further pursue
his research on Epicurus around 1630. By 1636, Naudé proposed to
Gassendi the composition of a manuscript to be circulated among a
circle of like-minded writers—one that would allow them both to se-
cretly elaborate and circulate their heterodox notions without fideistic
scruples (270-2). 

Knowledge is really nothing more than true belief. Since knowledge is a certain kind of brain state, it doesn't matter how the brain state was achieved. It could have been by accident? But what about justification? Here we see how inquiry changes the thing inquired after. Once the idea of justification has been raised, the standards for what counts as knowledge have been raised. But this is a psychological, rather than a metaphysical concern. (If I can discover other instances of 'inquiry changing the thing inquired after' this might be an interesting topic. Enumerating the psychological ways in which faulty arguments seem plausible would be a worthy task for philosophy, even in the absence of supernatural speculations.)

Even the use of the word 'is' in Russell's and Frege's project to prove that mathematics 'is' reducible to logic should be treated with suspicion. We have to first settle what logic and mathematics are. If they are mystical objects, then the project has the utmost metaphysical significance. If they are brain states, then the project is impossible, because a series of brain states cannot be reduced to another series of brain states.

We are not presented with sense-data as the immediate objects of our perception, as the indirect realists would have us believe. We are presented with the everyday world of trees, sun, animals, etc. In other words, material, persistent objects. When the indirect realist argues for the primacy of sense-data, he either (1) asks us to introspect and claims that all we really see are patches of color, specific pitches, etc. But this is to replace the primary act of perception with its self-reflective, secondary act of apperception. Or (2) he asks us to recognize that our perceptions are only brain states that arise from light particles, sound waves, etc. impinging on our sense organs. But this presupposes that the everyday world of objects exists. But, he may say, what guarantees that the real objects resemble our perceptions? However, this unduly separates our perceptions from the objects. Blueness just is 'reflecting light in such-and-such a way'. So, it doesn't make sense to say that our perception is blue while the object is not blue.

Colonialism is nothing but the fact that, for the first time in history, a society had achieved the economic prosperity to enable the dregs (criminals, sexually repressed, mentally ill, etc.) could leave their society in order to become the "nobles" of a different people through force. The economic bathtub had risen so high that the frothy detritus spilled over the edge of Europe and into the rest of the world. But it could have happened anywhere. The dregs of China would have been just as vicious and brutal and domineering as the dregs of europe.
The Ship of Theseus paradox is an example of why models shouldn't be reified. The linguistico-conceptive model used by human minds to predict/digest events does not correspond to reality.

The fact that Protestantism was needed to break up the Christian cult and make space for freedom of thought and atheism does not at all mean that republicanism, atheism, etc. are connected to or dependent on Protestantism. Protestantism was the force that made space for free thought, but it does not itself represent free thought. 
