***** INTRODUCTION *****

[Rework this introduction to frame Modern philosophy as philosophical protestantism. The gradual sacrifice of worldly metaphysics with divine elements to an eventual deism, but not atheism. Supernatural moral values preserved. Cult leaders trying to maintain control of the cult in the light of contradictory evidence. Free-thinkers and genuine atheists suppressed and burned. The legacy is that magical thinking is preserved in the two philosophical traditions, Analytic and Continental.]

[Standard interpretation of modern philosophy as a rejection of Aristotelian and Scholastic dogmatism and the rise of empiricism and science. One might have expected a move toward Atomism and materialism, especially as corpuscular science triumphed with Newtonian mechanics. In fact what happened was the opposite. Idealism took over. Even Hobbes and Spinoza were plagued by Stoicism. It still haunts Analytic and Continental contemporary philosophy to this day. G.E. Moore's revolution was partially successful, but he was usurped by the Wittgensteinian "Terror." Platonic idealism haunts Analytic philosophy. Kantian-Hegelian idealism haunts Continental philosophy.]

Luther represents an attempt to preserve Christianity after Catholicism had promised too much, i.e. preservation in this life from calamities, which had been disproven by the successful incursions of Islam into central and western Europe, the continuous indiscriminate deaths caused by the plague, etc. Medieval Catholics had forgotten the original strength of Christianity, i.e. to be a God of defeat, and paganized themselves by using saints, masses, etc. to promise tangible benefits in this life. Modern philosophy is the philosophical equivalent. It marks a retreat from philosophical incursions into the real world, with the intent of preserving Christianity in the world of Ideas.

The mistake of most histories of modern philosophy is that they treat the insane metaphysical speculations as legitimate ideas, worthy of consideration. Or else as amusing artifacts of a strange early modern world that always exceeds our comprehension. "Isn't it amusing that Leibniz could convince himself that monads actually exist? It's just that they didn't possess our standards of rigor!" But we should treat these speculations as deliberate attempts to mislead, even if the authors are so brainwashed that they are trying to mislead even themselves. We should treat them as we would some metaphysical pontifications of the Heaven's Gate, when their membership is under threat.

The standard way of understanding modern philosophy is that it represents a fundamental break with the scholastic philosophy that had gone before. That Galileo and other natural philosophers poked sufficient holes in the Aristotelian-Aquinean way of understanding the world to allow it to be overturned by a materialistic way of understanding the world that culminated in Newton, and gave raise to the Enlightenment in various disciplines apart from philosophy. This narrative is of course an oversimplification in various ways. For a start, the Aristotelian-Aquinean system was not at all the dominant position in Western medieval philosophy, considered as beginning in 476 with the fall of the Western Roman Empire to 1564 with the birth of Galileo. Rather, Aquinas represents merely the final stage of a medieval philosophy. And Aquinas himself was in a way forced to reconcile existing medieval philosophy with Aristotle's writings, most of which had been only recently rediscovered, due to their sheer quality.  Thus, although Descartes and Gassendi, for example, express dismay with the current state of scholasticism, and its stifling of creativity, the bulk of medieval philosophy can be better understood as an attempt to reconcile the Bible with everyday experience. The writings of the Church Fathers and post-Aquinean medieval philospohers writing on topics other than causation, hylomorphism, etc. might be rather said to occupy the bulk of medieval philosophy. And, as we will see, in many ways modern philosophy is rather a return to the Church Fathers and other medievals than a break with medieval philosophy simpliciter.  

More importantly for my purposes, this account is an oversimplification because modern philosophy did NOT embrace mechanism. That is, if we understand mechanism to mean Epicureanism, i.e., to encompass a materialistic ontology, no soul, so afterlife, no gods, no supernatural morals, etc. The refutation of the Aristotelian worldview left people searching for alternatives, and other ancient Greek and Roman authors were a ready source of inspiration. The De Rerum Natura of Lucretius was popular and in print, and yet no modern philosopher, not even Gassendi or Hobbes, was prepared to endorse Epicureanism in full, or in unmodified form. If we accept that the Epicurean position is, in its major points, true, as I do, then this poses a puzzle. Why was the truth thus suppressed by every modern philosopher? Why were modern philosophers, although innovative in other respects, so deeply conservative about certain propositions such as the existence of God and an immaterial soul? In this essay, I want to argue that the history of modern philosophy is usefully read as an unconscious avoidance of the Epicurean position. Epicureanism is center stage, although in absentia. Modern philosophy is a series of attempts to make sense of the rejection of the Aristotelian universe and the apparent truth of a mechanistic natural philosophy, while preserving core Christian beliefs such as the existence of a caring God and a life after death. As we will see, even Analytic and Continental philosophy were shaped by unconscious Christian beliefs and desires.

This is not a problem with modern philosophy per se. It is more a problem with how it is taught to students. It is taught as though it were a revolution, which freed the minds of Catholic dogmatism and allowed for the birth of the industrial revolution, the modern age, etc. In fact, modern philosophy is deeply conservative. It is a series of attempts to avoid, at any cost, the natural consequences of scientific discoveries made by astronomers and the early physicists and chemists. A better analogy would be the reaction of a cult when one of the cental tenets of the cult (for example, the cult founder's immortality, or that the world will end on a particular date) is found out to be false. The cult leaders need to reconvene and create new theories about why their previous views were wrong. But the central aim of maintaining the status quo is never abandoned. 

One easy answer to the question of why no modern philosopher endorsed Epicureanism is that he or she faced excommunication or worse by the Church, if he did so. Thus, although they pretended to endorse Christian beliefs in order to avoid persecution, they really are much more radical than they appear to be. After all, this interpretation goes, they gave birth to the contemporary, post-Christian age! Hobbes, perhaps, comes the closest to matching this interpretation. He belatedly adopts Stoic determinism in order to allow for a vehicle through which God can influence the world (Newton was to follow suit). But he never admits of the immaterial soul, and he insists that the Bible calls for bodily resurrection only. These can be seen as the least adjustments necessary, half-heartedly made, to avoid excommunication. But, if so, why did he not draft publications, to be published posthumously, that retracted these adjustments? The same can be asked for every other modern philosopher. Why are there no posthumous publications that embrace Epicureanism in toto? I want to argue, instead, that Hobbes's theism was ingenuous and that every other modern philosopher was a committed Christian. Whether their Christianity is primary, or their desire to believe in their own immortality and a God are primary, is an interesting question in itself but not material to the substance of my thesis. In either case, their powers of reasoning caused them to grasp the truth of Epicureanism, and their prior beliefs and desires caused them to immediately repress that truth. Modern philosophy is then, to speak in Freudian terms, the great sublimation that results from that repression. 

Historians of atheism have tended to search for "atheists," that is, people that are absolutely convinced that there is no God, and, moreover, are willing to publish books to that effect. When they cannot find any, the subtle historian ideas makes claims about the vast difference between the early modern mind and our own, such that atheism is literally impossible because there is not a conceptual framework to support it. These historians forget about Epicureanism. They also forget about the possibility that everyone has a certain degree of atheism within himself, which varies at different times of one's life. These historians, that is, implicitly assume that Christianity is the default position, and then hunt for outliers who do not embrace Christianity. I want to suggest, on the other hand, that atheism is the default position, and that Christianity is an additive. It is a set of practices, claims, etc. that bring a group of people together as a unit.

Even historians of unbelief have tended to ignore the possibilities offered by the Epicurean tradition. Thus, [author] writes in the "History of Atheism from the Renaissance to Modernity" that [insert quote about travel writers and Confucianism]. He ignores that fact that manuscripts of De Rerum Natura had been available since the 15th century and that Cicero's summary of Epicurean views before that. He may perhaps be deliberately passing over Epicureanism since the official Epicurean position is that the gods did exist, they simply floated around in the void all day with nothing to interest them and no desires to fulfill. Only a contemporary Anglo-American philosopher could be so humorless as to believe this official line straightforwardly!

Moreover, we should not accept the premise that we are in a post-Christian age at all. It may be argued that the emergence of the "secular" age is not characterized, as it may at first sound, by an increasing number of unbelievers, but simply by the fact that unbelievers could publish their opinions without fear of being burned alive. This is not nothing of course. But it is nothing like the dominance of atheism or agnosticism that most commentators imply it to be. It is as if the Christians finally realized that authoritarian control was no longer necessary to make people believe. They would believe just as they had in the beginning, because they wanted to believe. As Nietzsche knew, it is nearly impossible to rid oneself of all religious beliefs. The desire that there should be magic in the world is firmly rooted in our psychology, and it - coupled with the legacy of the moderns - affects everyone from Derrida to David Lewis. The impact of modern philosophy was to transmute our Christian beliefs, and to hide our Christianity, even from ourselves.

This essay will likely not appeal to someone who is not already an Neoepicurean, by which I mean a physicalist, atheist, and hedonist. But my hope is that it will really appeal to those of my readers who are Neoepicureans. It is exciting to be able to look at the course of modern philosophy in a new light. Finally, we can begin to see why these insane metaphysical systems were developed. We also do not have to treat them as viewpoints worthy of consideration, as in the usual course of study. They are instead negotiations of persons whose worldview is being threatened by undeniable facts. They are defense mechanisms at best, and disingenuous pieces of propaganda, at worst.

We should first of all reject the premise of modern philosophy professors that any dramatic discovery or new systems arose in the 17th century in philosophy. They would say that, after all. But there was no dramatic discovery. Western philosophy began by being Platonic. Then it became Aristotelian. Then it became half-Stoic, half-Epicurean (I don't dignify the skeptics). Then it became Platonic-Christian. Then it became Aristotelian-Christian. Then it became Stoic-Christian. This final transition is all that is meant by the "Rise of Modern Philosophy." Aquinas's Aristotelian-Christian philosophy was shown to be false, since it was disproved by empirical observations. People lurched around searching for an alternative frame of thought that could be suitable and settled on Stoicism. That's it. The true philosophy, Epicureanism, was rejected because people were too much in the sway of Christianity, and because Epicureanism is inherently unpalatable.  The subtlest of interpreters, like Hobbes and Spinoza, saw that the Bible too, was contradicted by the new natural philosophy, and thus pushed the envelope to a Stoic-Fideism, but neither had the courage to dispense with God altogether.

Aristotle reified Eudoxus's model of the cosmos, starting a trend that plagues philosophy to this day. It's no surprise that Aristotle's system was overturned. It was false, after all. And agricultural and technological advancements had rebounded the European population after the devastating plague outbreaks of the 14th century. Ancient texts had been rediscovered and translated. A lot of smart people were reading and discussing natural philosophy. The appetite for astrological almanacs drove greater and greater precision in astronomical observations.

Every history of modern philosophy begins with Descartes's Meditations. In which Descartes single-handedly overturned scholasticism and embarked philosophy on its new era of Rationalism, culminating in the work of Frege, or whomever the darling of one's particular Analytic university is. Descartes did it literally from his arm-chair. But it would be much more dramatic and effective to begin with a supernova: the supernova of November 1572.

Any history of modern philosophy should begin with the insane abuses of the Catholic church in the 1500s. The Catholic church's corruption created a swell of animosity towards it, which made space for heretical thinkers in the late 1500s and early 1600s. The notion that the rediscovery of the De Rerum Natura or any ancient text precipitated the transition from medieval to modern philosophy is misguided. Epicurus's own primary texts had never stopped being available thanks to their being preserved by Diogenes Laertius in the Lives of the Eminent Philosophers. And atheistic, materialist, and hedonist arguments had been propounded (for the purpose of refutation) by countless early Christian and Medieval thinkers. The relevant changes were two-fold. First, the groundswell of antagonism to the Catholic church mentioned above, of which Luther and Calvin were only the most eloquent mouthpieces. Second, the recording of empirical measurements which falsified the Scholastic physical theory.

What the usual histories of modern philosophy do not teach you is that the works of Descartes and Hobbes were preceded by more radical atheistic-materialistic tracts. Descartes and Hobbes represent a conservative backlash against these tracts. They are preserved as canonical for various reasons, which I will leave to the reader to weight (1) they are closer to the truth; (2) they are superior in quality; (3) they were more influential on the course of modern philosophy; and (4) they accommodated themselves more successfully to the Christian church, which was and remains powerful.

The usual histories of modern philosophy and even of the scientific revolution imply that the 17th century was a time of great progress for Europe. As though Europe had been struggling slowly toward the truth and then leapt forward in the 17th century, usually, the story goes, do to (1) the rediscovery of ancient texts, (2) the invention of the printing press, (3) the discovery of new continents, and (4) the reformation. The four factors combined like sunlight, warmth, good soil, and air to cause the flowers of modern philosophy to bloom and flourish. But in fact the truth about the natural world had already been deduced centuries before Christ by the Atomists and Epicureans. We actually went backwards after the fall of the Roman Empire. The logos is a bunch of horseshit, sure, but it's better than the substantial form. In the realm of science, the only significant things that were added were the use of mathematics and experiments. In the realm of philosophy, the course of modern philosophy is rather one of trying to avoid the truth of Epicureanism at any cost. What had happened in between 400 B.C. and 1600 A.D. of course, was that Europe had fallen under the spell of a cult. The cult expounded its own worldview, and burned at the stake anyone that questioned it. We should not wonder then at the causes of the scientific revolution. The truth will always out. What is worth noting is how long the truth managed to be suppressed. And that it is still being suppressed by the heirs of modern philosophy, that is, Analytic and Continental philosophy. There is also the implication that the switch to mechanism was preceded by various discoveries that meant that mechanism could explain some phenomena better than hylomorphism. There were no such discoveries until the 1800s. What happened instead is that, once various holes had been poked in the predominant Aristotelian worldview, people simply adopted an alternative ancient Greek world view: that of the atomists. Just as the atomists, amazingly, deduced the truth (or near-truth) of atomism from the arm-chair, modern philosophers reverted back to atomism without any good reason to do so. Of course, we should not treat atomism as an equal alternative to other philosophies. Atomism is just characterized by a refusal to posit invisible, magical agents as the explanation for any effects. Rather, they only posit physical explanations for everything. Thus, everyone is an atomist to a certain extent. It only becomes a question of whether something arises that one thinks calls for a supernatural explanation.

In 1600, the world consisted of a stable Earth at the center, surrounded by rotating spheres of quintessence. It was populated by objects, which, although composed of matter, each contained its own little soul (for the substantial form is nothing other than a soul), which gave it its powers, properties, and purpose. The overall purpose was the advance of Christianity and the service of the Christian God. In 1800, this had all been changed. The world consisted of corpuscles of atoms that moved in the void of space. Their motions and collisions are what gave rise to objects' properties. The Earth was merely one planet orbiting and spinning around the Sun, and the Sun one star in a vast universe of planets and stars. Only humans and God had immaterial souls. This is one description of modern philosophy. Although prima facie plausible sounding, it is not correct is it? That's because the final worldview is not what came to be accepted by philosophers. Instead, the dominant position in 1800 was idealism. Idealism says that reality is primarily composed of mental objects. Luckily, in the early 1900s, G. E. Moore and Bertrand Russell came along and freed us from this laughable view. Didn't they?

The Roman and Medieval scorn for Epicureanism is due to the fact that it doesn't lend itself to controlling others. The morality of Stoicism and Christianity allow people in a position of power to use guilt and inadequacy (think of the anguish of poor Marcus Aurelius about his own failures as a Stoic, even though he is Emperor of Rome) to control people and to extract a tithe from them or indulgences. Epicureanism does not allow for this, so it is dismissed by the elites.

Modern philosophy was defined by three mathematicians and physicists: Descartes, Leibniz, and Kant. But we should always be suspicious of the mathematician/physicist turned philosopher, because no other species is more likely than a pure philosopher to reify a model. Their whole identity depends upon reifying models.

There are two kinds of people. Those who love truth and those who love magic. There are not very many of the former, and most of them are not philosophers. Contemporary philosophy is plagued by the desire for magic. On the Continental side, the belief in the noumenal soul, which somehow creates the world it inhabits. On the Analytic side, the belief in abstract concepts that somehow structure the world. Very few want to deliver the truth, for the truth is simple and boring. Most want to invent a new language, or a new paradigm, a new way of talking about and seeing the world, and to write a book that will make others feel like they felt when the read the Phenomenology of Spirit. Thus the molested child becomes a pedophile.

One can really only understand the history of modern philosophy is one accepts that Christianity is a cult. And, like any cult, it seeks to impose a totalitarian worldview on its members. This was successful for a few hundred years, but then Martin Luther pointed out that the Church was lying about Purgatory and indulgences. And that the Church (and the Bible) were wrong about the fact that the Earth is stationary. Thus the facts were shown to be incompatible with the Church's worldview. A new worldview needed therefore to be created if the Church was to maintain its hold on its followers. Modern philosophy is a series of attempts at creating that worldview.
 
***** DESCARTES *****

Descartes's "Meditations on First Philosophy" represent the first and perhaps clearest example of my thesis that modern philosophy is an unconscious attempt to avoid Epicureanism, at any cost. Descartes opens the Second Meditation by claiming that "[s]o serious are the doubts into which I have been thrown as a result of yesterday's meditation that I can neither put them out of my mind nor see any way of resolving them. It feels as if I have fallen unexpectedly into a deep whirlpool which tumbles me around so that I can neither stand on the bottom nor swim up to the top." Descartes thus refers to the skeptical doubts for which the Meditations became famous, and to which many commentators thought he had no satisfactory response. But, if one returns to the text of the first meditation, one sees that Cartesian skepticism is very idiosyncratic and doesn't at all warrant the emotional response he describes at the start of the second meditation. 

The impetus for Descartes's skepticism is the overturning, in his lifetime, of the geocentric view of the world. Philosophical commentators tend to focus on the rejection of Aristotelian substantial forms as the most important philosophical innovation that ushered in modern philosophy. However, it's worthwhile to consider the more macroscopic view. Prior to the astronomical discoveries of the late Renaissance period, the most famous representatives of which are Copernicus and Galileo, the orthodox philosophical worldview consisted of a geocentric sphere, with Earth at the center, and the heavens consisting of a mostly homogenous, fairly uninteresting material substance, the aether. The Earth, at the center, contained a great hierarchy of living things that culminated in humans. It was a great round dollhouse for God, in other words, and it was easy to imagine Him taking a personal interest in all the various goings-on of His little creations. Nietzsche has focused on Christianity's undervaluing and rejection of the material world in favor of the afterlife. But this is not the correct way of understanding the medieval Catholic Christianity in which Descartes was raised. (It rather corresponds to the more modern Lutheran and Calvinist forms of Christianity, which focused on the Platonic elements of Christianity.) The Earth is an important, perfectly-ordered creation at the center of God's concerns. 

After the discoveries of the astronomers, however, this worldview has been refuted. The universe instead consists of a vast void, through which tiny planets, comets, and stars a moving. Plato, Aristotle, the Church Fathers have been shown to be wrong about the fundamental order of the universe. Instead, the ancient Atomists, Epicureans, and Stoics have been shown to be right.

This is the context, I would suggest, in which we should read Descartes's statement at the beginning of the first Meditation that "[s]ome years ago I was struck by the large number of falsehoods that I had accepted as true in my childhood, and by the highly doubtful nature of the whole edifice that I had subsequently based on them. I realized that it was necessary, once in the course of my life, to demolish everything completely and start again right from the foundations..." This demolishing takes the form of Cartesian skepticism, but the metaphor is an apt one for what has happened to Aristotelian geocentric worldview. 

Descartes actually quickly refutes, or at least rebuts, the "dream skepticism" with which he is popularly associated. He claims that, even if the particulars of the "dream" are false, the underlying principles would remain true. "So," he writes, "a reasonable conclusion from this might be that...arithmetic, geometry, and other subjects of this kind...contain something certain and indubitable. For whether I am awake or asleep, two and three added together are five..." It is at this point that his skepticism takes an unusual turn. He raises the possibility that God is deceiving him into believing false versions of the a priori propositions he described above, for example that God deceives him into "go[ing] wrong every time I add two and three." This, Descartes admits, would be inconsistent with God's supreme goodness. But, rather shockingly, Descartes claims that all sensory illusions are inconsistent with God's supreme goodness, and yet they exist. 

At this point, Descartes suggests that atheists are able to avoid the unusual form of skepticism he has laid out. Thus, an atheist may be susceptible to skepticism about a posteriori truths (based on dream skepticism), but not skepticism about a priori truths, since there would be no omnipotent being capable of deceiving one about a priori truths. Thus he says that "perhaps there may be some who would prefer to deny the existence of so powerful a God rather than believe that everything else is uncertain." However, Descartes immediately contradicts himself. Conjuring the Stoic and Epicurean worldviews, respectively, he writes that "[a]ccording to their supposition, then, I have arrived at my present state by fate or chance or a continuous chain of events, or by some other means." He then argues that these origins are likely to endow humans with infallible judgement, even about a priori truths: "yes since deception and error seem to be imperfections, the less powerful they [i.e., the Epicureans and Stoics] make my original cause, the more likely it is that I am so imperfect as to be deceived all the time." His final chain of skeptical arguments in the first meditation might therefore be summarized as follows:

(1) One is unable to distinguish between dreams and reality, therefore one may always be in error about statements of particular fact, e.g. "There is a keyboard in front of me."
(2) Either there is a God or there isn't.
(3) If there is a God, He may be deceiving me about a priori propositions, e.g. "2 + 2 = 4."
(4) If there isn't a God, there is nothing to guarantee that my faculties perfectly latch on to the truth, even about a priori propositions.
(5) Thus, in either case, one may always be in error about a priori propositions.

The peculiar feature of Descartes's skeptical arguments (putting aside their plausibility for the moment) is that he appears to take them on the chin like a good empiricist. It is an almost Quinean response. The correct answer to skeptical arguments is always to resist the skeptic's implicit premise that his doubts necessitate raising our standards for what counts as knowledge. Thus, the proper response to Descartes's argument that God might be deceiving us about "2 + 2 = 4" is not to say that we do not know that "2 + 2 = 4." It's to accept, with due humility, that no knowledge is absolutely certain and that the definition of the word "to know" is not equivalent to "to be absolutely certain about." Of course, that does not mean that we should not attempt to rebut the skeptic's arguments on their face as well. But that is the subject of another essay.

What concerns us here is that Descartes retreats to a stable, commonsense position: "I shall never get out of the habit of confidently assenting to these opinions, so long as I suppose them to be what in fact they are, namely highly probable opinions -- opinions which, despite the fact tha they are in a sense doubtful, as has just been shown, it is still much more reasonable to believe than to deny." (This response is actually more persuasive that the one he reaches at the end of the Meditations, that God exists and His infinite goodness entails that skepticism is unwarranted. Arnauld showed this rebuttal to be unsatisfying, since it leads to the infamous Cartesian circle.) His subsequent skepticism - the celebrated evil demon scenario - is the result of a deliberate effort to think of ways to undermine his commonsense beliefs. "It will be a good plan," he writes, "to turn my will in completely the opposite direction and deceive myself, by pretending for a time that these former opinions are utterly false and imaginary." But notice how incongruous this is with the beginning of the second meditation, where Descartes writes that he has "fallen unexpectedly into a deep whirlpool which tumbles me around so that I can neither stand on the bottom nor swim up to the top." Is that an apt metaphor for artificially forcing oneself to doubt one's everyday beliefs? It seems rather that Descartes has forgotten the end of the previous meditation, and has actually come to believe the evil demon hypothesis, instead of merely supposing it in the quest to see if any propositions are indubitable. Why is there such an emotional valence to his language? The reason is that Descartes is really referring here to the abolishment of the Timean-Aristotelian worldview. What had been previously taken as a firm foundation, the Earth itself, at the center of a beautiful universe of crystal spheres spinning with mathematical order, has been replaced by the atomistic void. There is no bottom nor top, because there is no absolute up or down in the atomistic system. Descartes writes: "Archimedes used to demand just one firm and immovable point in order to shift the entire earth; so I too can hope for great things if I manage to find just one thing, however slight, that is certain and unshakeable." Descartes phrases this search as an epistemological one: he ostensibly searches for one proposition that is not susceptible to the skeptical argument. But it is actually a metaphysical search: he searches for some object in the world that the Church Fathers have not been wrong about, some object which will sustain his religious faith. 

Notice that, in the dedicatory letter to the Faculty of Theology at the Sorbonne, Descartes says nothing about skepticism. Rather he says that his aim is to provide demonstrative proofs for two propositions: the existence of God and the existence of an immaterial soul. Descartes, like many theologians before him, seems to imagine that the towns and cities are swarming with atheists, and that it is up to him to refute them and save Christianity. [There may actually have been an increase in atheism in the 1600s. See the "History of Atheism from the Renaissance to Modernity."] Once the Faculty endorses Descartes's views, he writes, "the atheists, who are generally posers rather than people of real intelligence or learning," will be induced by the Faculty's authority "to lay aside the spirit of contradiction." But of course this is all imagined by Descartes. There are no swarms of atheists. It is rather Descartes's doubts about the truth of Christianity that he is responding to here. There is an argument that we should believe in the existence of God because it's contained in the Bible. And we should believe the Bible because it is the word of God. He writes that the "unbelievers" would call that argument circular. But there is a suggestion here that Descartes himself believes the argument to be circular. And that he himself needs a philosophical proof for the existence of God and the immaterial soul. Thus, he seems to be an example of the old adage that those who preach the loudest are those with the deepest doubts. 

Anglo-American historians of philosophy have tended to understand Descartes's cogito as the fundamental premise of a grand argument that Descartes will build on to create his philosophical system. They are influenced by the Analytic tradition, on which everything is a proposition. It is more apt, however, to interpret it as physical retreat into the human mind. Descartes cedes the ground of the external world, since, with the refutation of the Geocentric world of substantial forms, it has been shown to be an Atomistic wasteland, devoid of inherent value or religious significance. Instead, he retreats into the last entity that is not clearly material, the human "soul." Moreover, Descartes is happy to cede that ground, and he enlists his demon in order to do so, because he is only interested in affirming the Christian worldview in a way that accommodates the recent triumphs of Atomism.

Descartes's true skeptical doubts are not about the veracity of his sense impressions. They are about the truth of the Christianity. The Scholastic worldview has been shown to be false. Why should not the rest of theology be false as well? Thus, Descartes needs arguments that will reassure himself of his belief in God and the immortal soul. Cartesian dualism is nothing more than an attempt to salvage these two, God and soul, from the mechanistic abyss into which the external world has been plunged. The Meditations are Descartes's line in the sand. Atomism can encroach thus far, into bodily substances, but not into mental substances. With Descartes, philosophy crawled into the self, and it has not emerged since.

For all the ink that has been spilled about Cartesian skepticism and Rationalism, the Meditations are fundamentally about metaphysics. Descartes is here, at bottom, interested in offering some arguments for the existence of God and the immaterial soul. His arguments for the existence of God are pretty standard fare, slight variations on medieval ontological arguments, and not really worth discussing here. His arguments for the existence of immaterial souls are more pertinent, since it is here that we find Descartes directly engaging with the Epicurean/Stoic challenge to the previous Christian worldview.

Descartes's line of attack is ingenious. He seeks to use the new mechanist worldview, rather than as a threat to the Christian belief in the soul, instead as a weapon in his own favor. He first establishes that selves are fundamentally thinking things, in the famous cogito argument. He then seeks to deprive material objects of any inherent properties other than extension, through the wax argument. The wax argument might be summarized as:

(1) The sensory properties of material objects are transient.
(2) If a property is transient, I do not clearly and distinctly perceive it.
(3) I do not clearly and distinctly perceive the sensory properties of material objects.
(4) The extension of an object is permanent.
(5) A permanent property is essential.
(6) If I see that a property is essential to an object, I clearly and distinctly perceive that property.
(7) I clearly and distinctly perceive the extension of material objects.

The wax argument is ostensibly intended to show that the essence of material objects is mere extension, rather than anything more substantive. For example, we might have naively thought the essence of a diamond was to be a beautiful clear crystal that is harder than any other metal or precious stone. But for Descartes, these properties have been drained from the world. The color has literally and metaphorically been drained from the world. All the beauty and interest in the world has subsequently been transferred to the soul. Christianity's long retreat away from the world and into the soul has begun.

Descartes has thus provided the reader with an infinite amount of reductio ad absurdum arguments against materialism: "If only bodies exist, then there is no moral values, for moral values could not arise out of pure matter and motion. But there are moral values. Therefore something besides bodies exist." Or "If only bodies exist, then there is no thought, for thought could not arise out of pure matter and motion. But there is thought. Therefore something besides bodies exist." Etc. These arguments are so commonplace to us now that they seem to arise from our own introspections and intuitions. Thus, for example, centuries later an Analytic philosopher like David Chalmers could make his famous "Zombie" argument plausibly. It could be summarized as:

	(1) It is logically possible for a physically identical copy of oneself to exist, but for it to lack conscious experience.
	(2) If (1) is true, then facts about conscious experience are not identical to facts about physical constitutions.
	(3) Therefore, facts about conscious experience are not identical to facts about physical constitutions.

There is a lot of Analytic jargon here that Descartes did not have at his disposal, such as "logical possibility" and "facts" as entities (indeed, the metaphysically most basic entities, according to Analytic philosophers, but more on that later). But is not this fundamentally the same argument as Descartes's? And Chalmers's arguments have launched a whole cottage industry of the mind-body problem as a legitimate source of philosophical concern. I want to suggest that this situation is only possible because of Descartes's influence. We are living in the legacy of Descartes's attempts to preserve the Christian concept of the soul, so to us it does sound plausible that it is logically possible (i.e., not contrary to any of my clear and distinct impressions) that a Chalmerian zombie could exist. Notice, too that Descartes ends the second Meditation by peering out his window and asking "Yet do I see any more than hats and coats which could conceal automatons?"

It all boils down to a simple quirk of human consciousness, that the objects of introspection are not obviously material. When I look at a table, the table presents itself as a material object. But if I turn my attention to the self-conscious portion of that perception, i.e. my perception of the table, it does not present itself as a material object. It is a material object, it is my brain state. But it does not present itself as one. What is a physical object for us? It is an impingement on one of our nerves. Our optical and auditory nerves, for distant objects, or our tactile nerves for proximal object? What is a thought? It is a brain-state that has as its referent another brain-state. We I refer to my own consciousness, I have a brain-state that refers to a sequence of brain-states that I've previously had. But there are no nerves in the brain. Thus, I do not perceive this thought to be a physical object. But let's just offer to give Prof. Chalmers a little dose of LSD or a little bit of electroshock therapy and see how committed to his thesis that he is. I would wager that, when the chips are down, he will not wish to alter his brain permanently, for he realizes, in his reptile brain at least, that his consciousness is nothing but his brain states.

Descartes disingenuously claims in the Meditations that the common sense view is that the soul is a fine vapor. This is refuted by Hobbes's arguments that the soul is commonly understood as an incorporeal substance (which he claims to be a contradiction in terms). Descartes may be consciously avoiding Tertullian and other Patristic views, under which the soul really is understood to be an electricity-like substance. He wants instead to identify mind and soul as something we understand purely through introspection. Nothing has been so philosophically disadvantageous to humans than that we do not have nerves in our brains! If we could feel our synapses firing, and yes even feel ourselves willing synapses to fire, then mental objects would not even have arisen as a concept. How annoying that materialists are saddled with this spandrel. Now, any Tom, Dick, or Harry can "refute" materialism simply by saying, "But what about a triangle? That exists surely. But not as a physical object." Or Hobbes's argument that incorporeal substance is a contradiction in terms can be easily "refuted" by Henry More accusing him of begging the question. "I can conceptualize a substance that is immaterial. Can't you?"

Introduces a barrier to knowledge about the external world, that is not there w/r/t introspection. Dereifing the external world, in order to bolster the belief in the soul.

There is an analogy between the Cartesian method of proving the incorporeality of the mind and of proving the existence of God. God's essence may imply His existence, but if He doesn't exist in the first place, we needn't give a care what his essence implies. Just so, the mind's capacity for introspection and self-consciousness may "float free" of the corporeal world. But, without the corporeal world, there wouldn't be any mind that could so float free. Both mistake abstract objects for real objects.

"But practising chymists knew that they could often recover starting materials at the end of a sequence of transformations. For example, chymists knew that silver treated with acid ‘disappears’ into a clear, homogeneous liquid that passes freely through filter paper. When treated with salt, that liquid precipitates a heavy white powder, and that powder when mixed with charcoal and heated to red heat, gives the silver back again in its original weight. This well-known experiment indicated that the silver maintained its identity throughout, despite appearances and despite having been broken into invisibly small particles able to pass through the pores in paper. Chymical operations provided the best evidence for such ‘atoms’." (The Scientific Revolution - A Very Short Introduction, p.86) - Descartes's wax experiment.

***** HOBBES *****

Hobbes placed too much emphasis on his "Leviathan," i.e. his corporate person made up of individuals and willed by the sovereign power. He would scoff at the notion of natural laws or natural rights, claiming that, to paraphrase Charron, the sovereign is perpetual and absolute power, subject to neither restrictions nor conditions, subject to no human laws even those it has itself decreed; an absolute power, free to make and impose laws as it pleases. He has created his little abstract object the sovereign and now wishes to grant it absolute power. But he forgets that the sovereign is only an abstract entity, and that the true entities are the individuals that make him up. And if the the sovereign begins trampling on them too much, they will simply dissolve the sovereign. Hobbes loves his method too much. Having deduced the sovereign from psychological and natural premises, he holds on to the conclusion whilst forgetting the premises. Just so, our contemporary believers in the laws of nature and the mathematical structure of the universe make the same mistake. It may be the identical mistake to Hobbes. They use the individual objects and their properties to formulate the laws of nature or their logical-metaphysical structures, and then they come to believe that only the structures exist. They reify the model...because they love certainty more than truth. They forget that, were an object to acquire a new property, all their laws of nature would be immediately overturned, because the laws are only abstract objects and not real ones.

Hobbes is a proto-Kant. He tried to ground fideism in a purely mechanistic world. He also had a critique of reason, namely his proto-logical postivism and linguistic analysis. He did appropriate some Stoicism (either directly or through Descartes) in his physics by claiming that everything is determined and that there are laws of physics. But it was only in support of his political theory -- he wanted there to be laws of nature in the sense of natural laws that could lead to maximum happiness.

***** LEIBNIZ *****

As he declares in a very early text, the Confessio naturae contra atheistas of 1668–9, bodies are not self-sufficient.

***** KANT *****

Hume had gone so far down the Protestant rabbit hole with respect to the free will issue that he began to even doubt whether natural events were caused. The Humean God would not even need foreknowledge of events because there were no events in Hume's system. There were only a succession of states caused by God. Kant sought to vindicate natural causality, but also to vindicate divine foreknowledge by placing God outside of time.

Kant's philosophy was intended to say everything that could be said, which was not in contradiction to Lutheran theology. He therefore had to leave open the possibility of a noumenal world without asserting it definitively. His genius was to pass this off as epistemological modesty, rather than the cult propaganda it was.

Kant copied the Cartesian method of using skeptical doubt as a platform on which to establish a Christian metaphysics, but made it even more extreme. In order to evade the Humean doubts about causation and the laws of nature, Kant required that we are noumenal souls. "In Kant, perceptual material received from the world only becomes intelligible by being subsumed under categories and concepts in judgements which enable it to be identified with other such material." (German Philosophy: A Very Short Introduction, p.71) But what is the causal process that underlies this subsumption, we might ask? For the physicalist, an appeal to photons interacting with the optic nerve, firing synapses that trigger other synapses to fire in a way that has been previously trained, would suffice in principle. But not for Kant. Because the physical world, meaning the world of material objects governed by physical laws, only exists after this process of subsumption has occurred, on his view. (Here we see the germ of the idea that the physical world is only one interpretation of the world, which has freed Continental philosophy to make its beautiful contributions to conceptual art for the past few centures -- but also detached it from reality.) Thus this subsumption has to be some sort of power of the noumenal soul, which exists outside of time and space. A magical power, it turns out. But Kant was clever to disguise this preservation in the belief in the immaterial soul as a defense against skepticism, and even more clever to do it in such a way that even the Humeans can be tricked into believing it. "Yes, quite," they will say, "we can't say anything about causal interactions between things-in-themselves, only about phenomena." Never realizing (or perhaps they do realize it too, on a subconscious level) that they have thus tacitly endorsed Kant's Protestant philosophy of the soul.

***** SCHELLING *****

"In modernity, the sense of belonging to a meaningful whole becomes hard to sustain, and urbanization means that direct contact with nature tends to diminish for large parts of the population. Nature is also increasingly subordinated to the effects of science's analysis of its elements. This subordination gives priority to objectifying approaches over other ways of making sense of the world. The consequence can be a repression of certain aspects of ourselves, such as the need to experience the world as intrinsically meaningful: the sociologist Max Weber will later term this emptying of meaning from nature the ‘disenchantment’ of the world. " German Philosophy: A Very Short Introduction. Kant deceived everyone, but most of all the German Idealists, into believing that early modern science created any problems with valuation. But he did so only as cover to push his Lutheran agenda. "The alienation of modernity," the code-word for all the Continental sophisticates, is actually nothing but a call to return to the Church.

"German Idealism can therefore be understood as exploring the idea that subjectivity is ‘unconditioned’. In his attempts around 1789–90 to make Kant more convincing to a wider audience, Karl Leonhard Reinhold insisted that thought needed a foundation if a regress of the kind Jacobi described was to be avoided. He argued that the ‘fact of consciousness’ was not itself conditioned, because it is what enables us to be aware of conditions at all." Kant, by making causal interactions a relation between phenomena, raised a question about the causes of the existence of the self at all. They had taken the critical component too seriously, and not realized that Kant intended the noumenal self to be identical to the Christian soul.

***** HEGEL *****

The Continental philosophers, beginning with Hegel, deserve the greatest contempt, because one feels that philosophy is for them a sort of conceptual world-building or an agonistic art. But it is supposed to be the pursuit of truth, not an art.

***** NIETZSCHE *****

Nietzsche may ultimate be to blame for Continental philosophy's shift toward conceptual art. His sophomoric "insight" that there are no privileged epistemological stances toward the noumenal, that Wagner and scientists were fundamentally engaged in the same activity, led to proliferation of conceptual artists who no doubt considered themselves to be philosophers.

***** PHENOMENOLOGY *****

The phenomenologist's reply to the charge of idealism is telling. He will say, "The idealist asserts that an object is purely mental; a materialist asserts that an object is purely material. I make no such assertion. I merely interrogate the object in the manifold ways in which it presents itself to me, sometimes as a physical object in this-or-that context, sometimes as a mental objects in this-or-that context." But merely by reducing the physicality of an object to a mode of appearance, the phenomenologist is already implicitly committed to idealism, albeit transcendental idealism of a particular sort. The physicality of an object is primary, or else you are not a physicalist. If you are not a physicalist, then you are some form of idealist.

"The main forms of German university philosophy in the period in question are neo-Kantianism, the beginnings of analytical philosophy, and phenomenology. These all seek, in instructively different ways, to establish the role of philosophy in relation to the natural sciences." (German Philosophy: A Very Short Introduction, p.85) Modern philosophy is frequently stated to be a reaction to the "success of the sciences"? But why should that be a philosophical issue? The sciences are philosophy, they are natural philosophy, they are simply philosophy that is able to proceed for the most part untroubled by metaphysical/ethical issues? Why not let them to carry on about their work? Why should a philosopher feel threatened by the successes of the natural sciences? I would suggest that the reader substitute "the evident physicalism of the world" or "the confirmation of Epicurean metaphysics and ethics" whenever they read "the success of the sciences" in any work of modern philosophy. Then the true threat to philosophy comes to the fore. The threat is to either (1) the Christian belief in God or the immortality of the soul; or (2) the metaphysical-logical structure that governs the world and can only be accessed by a priori reasoning. Philosophers want to maintain (1) because they have drunk the Christian Kool-Aid knowingly or unknowingly, or just because they (rather sweetly) want to go on living forever and want there to be a benevolent being in charge of the universe (it would be nice). They want to maintain (2) out of a perceived threat to their own self-preservation. How could there be philosophy in the chaotic, hedonistic, Epicurean world? Philosophy would collapse into physics, surely? But this is a fallacious line of reasoning. There can still be philosophy without recourse to magic. There will always be questions on the margins that demand answers.

***** HEIDEGGER *****

The celebrated "life-world" of the late Husserl and Heidegger, which is being emptied of its meaning by the natural sciences. What if this turns out to be nothing but the pre-Reformation medieval European world?

The Dasein is nothing but the Cartesian ego but with every concession made to the skeptic. No longer can we speak of external objects, or a mind, or causation. Because, as Heidegger does not tire of reminding us, all that we are immediately acquainted with are our own experiences. Everything else is a supposition, or a paradigm, or a manner of interpreting the Dasein. Thus Heidegger may have felt self-satisfied that he was being more rigorous than Descartes or Kant or even a naive realist. He did not even suspect that his true (albeit repressed) aim was to avoid the physicalist worldview, and for religious reasons. A little colorless odorless substance such as was imbibed by his contemporaries would have cured him of his confusion between immediacy and truth.

***** ANALYTIC PHILOSOPHY *****

It is strange that the logical positivists took the lessons of modern philosophy to be that "the problems of philosophy are to be considered in terms of linguistic analysis" (German Philosophy: A Very Short Introduction pp.88-89), given that that's about the opposite conclusion of what it should have been. Rather, the lesson should have been a physicalist one: namely, that words are nothing but imperfect symbols for partially overlapping brain states amongst humans. There is thus almost no philosophical value in quibbling over the meaning of the word knowledge, for the word and its definition have no metaphysical significance; the word does not mean the same thing to all people; it cannot be analyzed because the brain state cannot be analyzed. We all want to eradicate magical thinking, but elevating language to a metaphysical level of importance, as Plato did, is not the right answer. 

It is tempting to rebut the metaphysical pretensions of Russell and other early Analytic philosophers, who wish to prove that the meaning of a word is just "the set of all instances of that word," or, as Bolzano put it, "the objective representation designated by any word is, as long as this word is not ambiguous, single," by pointing out that human language is nothing but a more complicated system of the grunts and whistles used by animals to communicate danger. That words and concepts have no connection to the abstract world of mathematics or set theory, because they are just sounds, and the brain states to which they are correlated. That humans are, after all, only animals seeking pleasure and avoiding pain and death and that it is vainglorious to entertain such metaphysical pretensions. However, this rebuttal is not entirely accurate. Because, after all, humans are not characterized by merely seeking pleasure and avoiding pain. Rather humans are characterized by being the types of creatures to come up with grand abstract universes and then attempting to convince other humans that these universes really exist and that we are somehow connected to them, and that if we just join this group, we will gain the key to understanding and mastery over the same.

It's Platonism except that, if you ever tell one of them so, they will talk you in circles until you don't believe it yourself.

How telling that the foundational figures of Analytic philosophy spent so much time agonizing over the flaws in the new predicate logic and in natural language. Galileo's paradox was only an amusing curiosity to the wily old empiricist. But for Frege it was a deep problem. Cantor's concept of transfinite numbers. What does this have to do with leading a good life? Russell's paradox and fictional personages take up a good third of our introduction to analytic philosophy courses. But what is there philosophical significance? It is only when you realize that predicate logic and set theory are meant to be metaphysical structures of reality, that you understand why all these little holes need to be patched. Poor Russell spent all of his time trying to establish the mathematical foundations of Wittgenstein's metaphysical postulate (which he disguised as an attempt only at rigor) that states of affairs, i.e. propositions, are the fundamental building blocks of the universe. Poor Russell and Moore were so desperate to escape from British idealism that they leapt straight into the arms of the first European they found who seemed not to be an idealist, only to be tricked into espousing Austrian idealism instead.

It's embarrassing that the aim of the logical positivists was so noble, to eliminate references to magic, cult-thinking, and superstition, but that their method for doing so was to latch onto another bit of magical thinking, the logical atomism of Wittgenstein. Were they not troubled by the self-contradictory nature of the Tractatus?

G. E. Moore and Bertrand Russell are always said to have "broken free" of German Idealism, giving rise to the much more fruitful and accurate Analytic Philosophy. But it's worth considering how much they actually remained attached to the fundamentals of German Idealism. Kant's great insight (really a misappropriation of Humean skepticism) was to shift the battlefield between Christianity and naturalism from metaphysics to epistemology. Where Descartes, Spinoza, and Leibniz came up with a series of fantastical metaphysical systems to avoid the conclusion of naturalism, Kant (at least exoterically) ceded that such systems were fantastical.  He thus ceded some ground to the naturalist. But he took away more ground by substituting a fantastical epistemology (borrowed from Plato), where the logical structure of the world is fundamental and the content is secondary. This epistemology, when reified, is what gave rise to the even more fantastical metaphysics of Fichte, Hegel, and J. M. E. McTaggart (the latter's view strips away all the obscurantism of Kant and German Idealism to reveal what was always their fundamental, if esoteric, worldview: Leibnizian monads). But what is the Moorean and Russellian worldview? It is the Philosophy of Logical Atomism, where propositions, also known as states of affairs, are the primary existent and the logical relations between propositions is what philosophy seeks to discover. It is, in other words, predicate logic reified, just as Kant's system was Aristotelian logic reified. This of course leads to the sorry situation of Analytic philosophy today, where our staunchest empiricist W. V. O. Quine is only ready to endorse physicalism in the sense of reifying the current best Physics textbook, not in the sense of denying that supernatural things do not exist. As David Macarthur realizes in "Naturalism from the Mid-20th Century to the Present: Quine’s “Hegelianism”, Armstrong’s Empiricism, and the Rise of Liberal Naturalism", his true aim is to reduce the world to logical relations, to arrive at the Russellian ideal: "A specific ontology is not important [for Quine]; through theoretical reductions (e.g. reducing physical objects to space-time regions or these, in turn, to classes of quadruples of numbers) we may treat our theory as yielding nothing more than the ontology of pure set theory so long as we preserve the structure of true sentences from observation sentences to theoretical predictions."

Russell bravely broke with the idealism of McTaggart. No, everything is not mind-dependent, he states. There is a mind-independent reality! It is an analyzable system of propositions. In other words, it's a system of abstract objects. But...what are abstract objects? Are they not ideas?

We must inquire as to why Russell did not return to realism and materialism when he rejected idealism. This would have been the chance. He could have set Analytic philosophy free of the Christian yoke once and for all, and return back to the cheerful light of day of Epicureanism. But instead he opted for indirect realism verging on idealism, then neutral monism verging on idealism, etc. One problem was his logic-worship. The certainty that logical proofs provide is so satisfying that logicians frequently take logic to be the underlying structure of the universe. They thus tacitly admit a supernatural substance, the Logos, into their ontologies and gravitate toward Stoicism instead of Epicureanism. This is also related to Russell's (and almost all of Analytic philosophy's) physics-worship. Every Analytic philosopher, it seems, is a wannabe physicist and is forever chafing at the fact that their math skills were not good enough to make it as a physicist. They thus reify the "laws" of physics as yet more mathematico-logical structure that is woven in to the fabric of the universe. Yet more supernatural tosh admitted willingly into the very center of their ontologies. Another problem with logic is that it leads to a desire to find epistemological axioms, and to use them as the central starting point of one's philosophy. Just as Russell seeks to construct the whole of mathematics out of the fewest number of logical axioms, he seeks to construct the world out of the "foundation" of his own interaction with it. Hume's mistake. Kant's response (transcendental idealism = indirect realism). Asymmetric standard raising. Sense data = stream of undifferentiated phenomena. Failure to appreciate the nature of perceptions as compounds (intentional component and self-conscious component). Sublimated desire to remain central to the universe. Sublimated desire for logical father-ruler. Sublimated desire for immortality. Unconsciously expressing the same desires that Christianity latched onto in the first place in order to exploit people. 

The problem with G. E. Moore and Bertrand Russell was not that they were too 'ahistorical', as many historians of philosophy, disgusted by the analytic tradition, will tell you. It's rather that they were not 'ahistorical' enough. They did not perceive the bad faith, the slavishness to Christianity, that lay behind modern philosophy since Descartes and they sought to engage with it as though it were an ingenuous attempt to discover the truth. Thus, when they came to reject idealism, they didn't do so in the proper way, by saying 'This is all magical thinking. This is all poppycock. The universe does not revolve around man.' They said 'perceptions are reality,' 'mental constructs are reality.' Thus Moore's claim that "it seems plain that a truth differs in no respect from the reality to which it was supposed merely to correspond: e.g. the truth that I exist differs in no respect from the corresponding reality — my existence. So far, indeed, from truth being defined by reference to reality, reality can only be defined by reference to truth." (Truth, 21) And Russell's attempts to formulate objects as postulates justified by the veil of perception. Instead of retreating from idealism back to some Epicurean common sense, they attempted to burrow through idealism to the other side. Moore said, 'Kant's transcendental idealism has had its day. I'll be the new Socrates. Russell, you'll be the new Descartes.' But they did not grasp that this overvaluing of subjectivity and reifying of mental objects was precisely the problem with transcendental idealism. Or, moreover, that it was deliberately orchestrated by Descartes and Kant as a means of preserving the belief in the immortal soul and, with it, the Christian faith.