The nonexistence of nonphysical moral goodness is probably the one tenet of Epicureanism that is most counterintuitive. It seems to be baked into human society to believe that certain of our actions possess a sort of magical property -- analogous to some objects which possess an electric charge -- that entails consequences. Sacrifice to and honor the gods and they will favor you. Desecrate a temple and the gods will punish you. I'm not an anthropologist, but my understanding is that most cultures have something like this worldview. It also seems baked into this worldview that your actions are in view of other persons. In order for morality to exist, of course, other persons must exist (or else whom could we wrong?). But the actions acquire their magical status, in part, perhaps because they get associated with this sort of "action at a distance" of the gods watching us from afar. Our moral sense is somehow entangled with our consciousness of ourselves as inhabiting a world with other conscious beings. It is reminiscent of the foundational problem with Sartre's existentialist metaphysics. If I am master of my own actions, if I can invent my own morality from scratch, why should the one I invent be at all concerned with the feelings of other people? Why should I treat other people as morally significant? I once attempted to solve this problem on Sartre's behalf by arguing that consciousnesses depends upon a consciousnesses-of-others, that our own conscious experience arises out of our coming to understand that we are an object with respect to others' conscious experience. But I would no longer subscribe to that sort of Continental-style argument that treats the structure of conscious as metaphysically primary. I would now say that conscious experience arises out of our mental structure and the inputs provided by experience. The last baby, kept alive in a nourishment vat after the death of the human race, would still become a conscious being. Albeit a very stupid and twisted one.  

What gives rise to our feeling that morality is supernatural is the nature of our social interactions in a world of finite resources. One example is the notion of debt. If we steal something from the neighboring tribe, there is created an abstract object in the minds of both tribes that we need to keep track of. Namely, the debt that we now "owe" to the other tribe. We need to keep track of it because it may be that the other tribe will come a raiding to steal something back. The awareness of other people's awareness or memory of our action is thus burned in our minds, and that of our tribe as a kind of invisible scoreboard that we need to keep track of. This "burning in" is different than our usual retention of long-term memories. Thus providing the idea that there is something special about our actions that gives them this moral valence over and above the causal impact of the actions. Notice too that the idea of outside observers is always already involved in our concept of moral valence. Thus, for actions that did not directly affect other people, the gods would serve as a proxy; they would be keeping score for us on a karmic level.

Nietzsche was therefore on the right track in Book 2 of the Genealogy of Morality, where he writes, for example, that "the major moral principle 'guilt' [Schuld] derives its origin from the very materialistic idea 'debt' [Schulden]" (although he appears to be unduly convinced that he was the first to make this rather obvious etymological connection) and that "To breed an animal that is entitled to make promises—surely that is the essence of the paradoxical task nature has set itself where human beings are concerned? Isn’t that the real problem of human beings?" But he errs (or is perhaps being rhetorical) when he implies that morality cannot function in an atheistic worldview. Toward the end of Book of the Genealogy of Morality, Nietzsche suggests that atheists in the 19th century were only extreme Protestants. That the commitment to "truth about what is actually in the Bible" metamorphosed into "truth about what we actually have evidence for." And that therefore "modern" atheists were still subconsciously committed to the Christian worldview. There is an element of truth to this, and certainly Nietzsche's perspective has become an influential one in Continental philosophy. However, he apparently forgets that Epicureanism, which is effectively atheist, preexisted Christianity and was in fact one of the dominant world-views at the height of the Roman Republic. 

Then the lines between the invisible scoreboard being maintained by our tribe and the neighboring tribes and between our duties to the gods became blurred and person-to-person actions came to have the same supernatural significance as person-to-god actions. Despite Nietzsche's rhetoric, there is absolutely nothing unique about Christian morality in this regard. His claims that the notion of people treating other people in a moral manner did not exist in pre-Christian morality, which was only concerned with being-a-noble vs. being-a-plebeian, is laughable. His only real argument is that the word "good" has two senses. Pre-Christian society could not function without a moral code. The Old Testament deals extensively in moral matters. Hammurabi's code is world-famous. I cannot believe that anyone has ever taken this part of the Genealogy to be a literal truth (yet when I arrived at Princeton I met a few of them, and how flimsy a foundation this kind of "genealogy" is for other philosophical projects). Moreover, even a cursory understanding of Confucian ethics -- and the concept of the dao -- would make one to understand that a supposed metaphysical significance to moral significance is the rule in ethical systems, rather than the exception. (The apocalyptic tone -- "give away all your possessions and worship me" -- and the political ramifications of the New Testament morality and it's claims that everyone is equal before the final judgment of God may be unique to Christianity. I would debate how significant the former is, given that very few people seem to have followed it. But the latter may be significant in political history, which Nietzsche doesn't really discuss.)

The notion of a metaphysical import to moral significance has proved to be very pervasive and hard to free oneself of. Plato and the Stoics, of course, got off to a bad start by making it the very center of their philosophies. Plato reified -- or rather apotheosized -- lots of properties, of course, but the Form of the Good became the King of the Forms. This King got synthesized with the God of Israel, forming the basis of Christianity. Epicurus told the truth about the matter, but he lost the war against the Christians. And now the cultural baggage of Christianity, coupled with unique state of moral "facts" in our minds combines to make moral realism the default position. So much so that Kant was prepared to sacrifice the "human soul as substantial form" and "God as an object of philosophy," but he was not prepared to contemplate moral antirealism. Or, more properly, he could not even conceive that Epicurean ethics is not an antirealist position. It saves morality without recourse to supernatural explanations. He was so thoroughly Christian that it was either moral realism in a supernatural sense, or no ethics at all. And this view was crystallized by Nietzsche. Sartre and the existentialists, despite their reputation, actually attempted to save something like the Epicurean view (ethics without God) but their own metaphysics was unable to support it, since it placed human subjectivity as the foundation of all reality.

But we must pretend to be a positivist for a moment and ask "what is morality if the world is purely physical?" This is a different question than "what is the good?" Morality is not so cuddly as the utilitarians would have us believe. It is an instinct, but not a rational instinct for everyone to get along, share the cake, etc. It is an instinct for the tribe to cohere, yes, but also...not to be wiped out. That is why Aristotle should be praised for placing courage and pride among the moral virtues. "Turning the other cheek" might be rhetorically part of the Christian morality. But it is not an actual moral value in the real world (only in the world that is about to end because the apocalypse is nigh). In the actual world, it is virtuous to get angry if you are being mistreated, and, yes, to seek to punish or get revenge on those that are mistreating you. Nietzsche again has an instinct for the truth in this matter, and almost arrives at it, but opts instead for sensationalism, aesthetic quality to his writing, and obscurantism. He tries to argue that punishment arose out of some perverse desire that humans have to torture one another:

	Where did this primitive, deeply rooted, and perhaps by now ineradicable idea derive its power, the idea of an equivalence between punishment and pain? I have already given away the answer: in the contractual relationship between creditor and debtor, which is as ancient as the idea of “someone subject to law” and which, in itself, refers back to the basic forms of buying, selling, bartering, trading, and exchanging goods...That means that the creditor could inflict all kinds of ignominy and torture on the body of the debtor—for instance, slicing off the body as much as seemed appropriate for the size of the debt. (Genealogy of Morality, Book 2, ss.iv-v)

He sees a connection between morality as a special valence that applies to actions, the notion of debt, the notion of punishment, and the concept of torture, but he opts for the most direct, and most controversial, route of connection. Namely, that morality arose out of the pleasure of torturing people. Whether or not you think this is his actual view (and I do not), it would be surely be ridiculous for any contemporary commentator to argue that it is the true view. And yet that it precisely what I have been taught, and not by mere associate professors! The concept of punishment is baked into the concept of morality, true. People enjoy punishing other people, and watching other people be tortured, true. Thus...morality is a human invention based on the enjoyment of torture? That idea appealed to me too, but then I turned 17. Rather, punishment is baked into the notion of morality, because the tribe needs a way of standing up for itself when it is wronged. The unity of the tribe needs to be maintained because human survival depends upon it. Humans enjoy torture for different, amoral reasons. They enjoy it because it is victory in battle with no chance of defeat. Imagine going into battle and being terrified that you will be hurt or killed. You finally meet your foe and you find that he is chained up and unable to swing his sword. You are able to slice and dice him with no fear of repercussion. How sweet a victory that would be. Do humans enjoy victory in battle because they have some sort of evil desire to hurt one another? Sort of. They do have an inherent enjoyment of violence against other humans. But not for an evil reason, it's rather for a good reason. Humans enjoy victory in battle because it's good for the tribe. There is a genealogy here, but it is not so aesthetically pleasing as Nietzsche and Foucault would have use believe. It is rather a change in the values of society, based merely upon its enlargement. War is rare, and my neighbors are all in my own tribe, thus I have no moral reason to be violent against any of them. Our enjoyment of violence, though a "good" instinct in the right time and place, has now become a "bad" instinct due to the alterations of human societal structure. Our enjoyment of torture is merely a manifestation of our enjoyment of violence. But the concepts of doing good or doing evil, and the special memorability and valence that attaches to moral actions does not "arise" out of our enjoyment of torture (no matter how we understand that slippery metaphor). Rather, it arises out of our social and material conditions.

But, again, we must try to shake off the apparently supernatural aspect of morality. In a materialist world, what is good? Obviously it would have nothing to do with doing one's duty or following a set of divine commandments or maximizing the utility of all plants and animals or (even) becoming a Sage. It would have nothing to do with actions at all. Rather, it would be the goods in the non-moral sense: good food, a loving family, security, enough money to feel comfortable, etc. We need not limit ourselves to the merely pleasant, as Epicurus may have done, (perhaps only for rhetorical effect). Perhaps creating a fine work of art, despite the trials and tribulations involved, was so satisfying as to be considered good. Perhaps dying under torture rather than ratting out one's comrades is so satisfying as to be rendered good. But it must be some sort of sought-after life-experience. Only an actual bio-chemical reaction in the brain can provide sufficient metaphysical grounding for a concept as weighty as this. 

Is this a disappointment? Perhaps, if you were expecting an eternity of bliss in the afterlife. (And notice what you were expecting.) But at least it's actually achievable. It's certainly contrary to the philosophical self-image since Plato. Philosophers like to imagine the herd of humanity lowing and milling around, basely eating and shitting and fornicating whilst they pursue the real Good, in the form of moral virtue and wisdom. But, in fact, the people are correct and the philosophers are wrong. They've been depriving themselves of enjoyment -- for no benefit, other than the feeling of superiority they've given to themselves. To say nothing of the poor generations of monks and nuns who have willingly sought the bad in place of the good (whilst being duped into thinking they're doing the opposite).

But a philosophy must tell us how to live, as Thoreau might say. The true philosophy's North Star would thus be a life of worldly enjoyments, as free as possible from disease, hardship, and stress. The communists' ideal might well serve (which is not to say that they are correct about how to achieve it), in which technology does most of the work, and humans are free to devote the majority of their time to intellectual or artistic pursuits (or whatever suits them best). But do not store away acorns for a winter that will never come. Thoreau quotes the Gospel of Mark, saying do not lay up treasure...

[Analogy between Moore's conception of the Good as a brute metaphysical entity, and the explanation of Greece's victory over the Persians because Zeus did not want one man to rule East and West, versus a conception of Good as a complicated, contingent set of mental states, and Herodotus's explanation as a complicated set of factors in the two armies that arose out of the politics of the preceding decades.]

[Moore's Open Question argument. https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/moral-realism/ ]