Non-physicalists are bothered by the difficulty in defining what counts as a physical entity. If only they were as bothered by the difficulty in defining what counts as a non-physical entity!

Descartes was responsible for his wilful mistranslation of the Epicurean notion of a clear and distinct perception. I have a clear and distinct perception of a pair of hands in front of me. I do not have a clear and distinct perception of any philosophical thesis, including that I exist as a immaterial soul or that I have free will. These are too permeated with our cultural upbringing, and not nearly immediate enough to be considered worthy as evidence for an Epicurean. G.E. Moore was fooled by this Cartesian misuse of the term into thinking that his own ethical intuitions could serve as a sufficient basis on which to doubt the truth of physicalism itself. And the legions of lazy analytic philosophers have followed suit, treating whatever intuitions they happen to possess as axioms, sufficient to spin whole webs of sophistry and deceit sufficient to ensnare Aquinas himself.

Western philosophy has been dominated by this cancerous growth of Christianity, which permeates even the purportedly atheistic strands. The Marxist utopia is nothing but a cerebral urge-for-heaven, rooted in Hegel, who sought fundamentally to do to Christian historicity what Kant had done to Christian metaphysics. Schopenhauer, Freud, Heidegger, Lacan, and Derrida are all permeated with the idea of a powerful outside force that "creates" reality in the human soul, and disregard the importance of the physical world. They thus seek to gain proximity between their immortal souls and the divine. Anything but to accept the humdrum, mundane, truth that we are animals in a purely physical world!

Time is an ambiguous concept which can refer to either (1) the physical entity, field, etc. that plays a role in dynamics; or (2) the experience of apperception during that unit of time. Thus, if we ask whether there was a time before humans existed, we can reach a state of aporia because, on the one hand, it seems clear from geological, astrophysical, etc. evidence that there was a time, but, on the other hand, we cannot imagine what the perception of that vast period of time would be - because there was no one around to perceive it.

The whole misadventures of the epistemological turn inaugurated by Descartes and perfected by Kant can be avoided if one asks oneself: was there ever a time during which the morning star and the evening stars were two different stars?