Book I

Fittingly, Plato begins by undermining the base drives. Cephalus notes approvingly that Sophocles felt liberated by his lack of sexual desire in old age. Our status as beings-in-time cause us to develop awareness of the hedonic treadmill, our inherent inability to fully satisfy our desires, thus it is rational (in a sort of sophomoric way) to want to be rid of them. But the inherent meaninglessness of a life devoid of desire causes us to project another life, in which we could be happy without desire, either with knowledge alone (forgetting that the desire for knowledge is a sublimated desire for power) or due to the proximity of God. This will eventually lead to the Allegory of the Cave and the Forms, and the idea that the rational component of the soul should dominate the other two. (329)

We also see right at the start Plato introducing the idea that moral virtue is sufficient for happiness. Although curiously he uses Cephalus to introduce the much more plausible view that virtue is necessary, but not sufficient for happiness, stating that "A good person wouldn’t easily bear old age if he were poor, but a bad one wouldn’t be at peace with himself even if he were wealthy." (330)

"Those who have made it [i.e., money] for themselves are twice as fond of it as those who haven’t." What the money-makers really love is their own feeling of superiority. They use money as a score-keeping device and thus seek to maximize their own sense of self-worth through maximizing their wealth. Those who are born wealthy must seek other ways to increase their self-esteem. (330)

Cephalus mentions "the stories we’re told about Hades, about how people who’ve been unjust here must pay the penalty there—stories he used to make fun of—twist his soul this way and that for fear they’re true." Proving that this is not a Christian invention, despite the yowling of the Nietzsche fan-boys. (330)

"[S]peaking of this very thing itself, namely justice, are we to say unconditionally that it is speaking the truth and paying whatever debts one has incurred? Or is doing these things sometimes just, sometimes unjust?" -- The first appearance of Socrates's irrational desire that all concepts should be perfectly analyzable into other concepts, that the world should consist of an axiomatic, Wittgensteinian system of interconnected facts. Something that still plagues Analytic philosophy to this day. We notice that Cephalus, who represents the moderate, wise, happy old man, takes this opportunity to leave gracefully (to attend to ritual practices), leaving the debate to the younger men. An Epicurean should have the temperament of Cephalus, but the mental acuity of Socrates! (331)

"But surely people often make mistakes about this, believing many people to be good and useful when they aren’t, and making the opposite mistake about enemies?" -- Here we see another issue that continues to plague Analytic philosophy. Polemarchus hypothesizes that justice is benefiting one's friends and harming one's enemies. Socrates then introduces a kind of privileged epistemic state, wherein one's friends are not actually good and useful to one, but one merely believes that they are. Human psychology makes it difficult to assent to a position of limited knowledge. Thus Polemarchus is hesitant to say "I mean doing good to those whom I believe to be my true friends, to the best of my knowledge." Instead, it is natural to wish to assent to the more privileged state and say, "no, I mean doing good only to my true friends." Socrates, by introducing the specter of these false friends, has shifted Polemarchus into a sort of Gods-eye-view, which is problematic for defining terms. We see the same issue with respect to discussions of credence. If I say, it is rational for me to make my credence in a proposition proportional to the amount of empirical justification I have for the proposition, some jackass will interject "but do you mean actual empirical justification or only perceived empirical justification? It's problematic either way..." These numbskulls need to get it into their heads that the God's-eye-view does not exist when it comes to epistemology or ethics! Justice, and all morality, is not a metaphysical phenomenon that permeates the universe. It really exists...but only in human brains. If we take Polemarchus's view, it is not what I would consider to be a definition of justice. I would say something about everyone receiving punishments or rewards that accurately reflect the worth of their actions. However, it is a sort of boiled down view of a basic moral sense. If we're aspiring to be moral, we should try to help our tribe. Today we would likely leave out the bit about hurting the other tribes (we're all one tribe now) but I can live with it. Then some pedant comes along and introduces a scenario in which someone on my tribe is actually conspiring against me, and asks if it's still just to help that person. We should reply that all moral concepts must be phrased within the subject's limited point of view. We should bite the bullet and say "yes," it is just to help the conspirator, because the subject is not in this epistemically privileged state that Socrates introduces.  Plato actually reveals the absurd consequence that Socrates's argument leads to, namely that "good people are just and able to do no wrong." Although Polemarchus assents to this position!  The real lesson of Plato's early dialogs is that philosophical concepts are unanalyzable. Plato took from this fact a grand metaphysical thesis that elevates the concepts to god-like status. However, one might be satisfied with the more limited thesis that concepts are something like outlines that overlap, although imperfectly, with an individual's experience and memory and thoughts. Thus, when I say "justice," I have a certain cluster of memories of actions, persons, etc. that I would term just (perhaps because a parent or other authority figure called them just). But someone else will have a different mental cluster. The concept is nothing more than a word that invokes our respective cluster. We should not expect it to stand in any grand metaphysical relation with other words or propositions, because the human mind does not compose concepts out of other concepts. It composes them out of experiences, memories, and logical deduction. (334)

"You must look at it as follows, my most simple Socrates: A just man always gets less than an unjust one. First, in their contracts with one another, you’ll never find, when the partnership ends, that a just partner has got more than an unjust one, but less." It is telling that Thrasymachus cannot even articulate his position in a coherent way. Surely, on his view, the JUST man would be the one that uses his own power to his advantage. He reverts here to the common-sense idea of morality. (343)

Thrasymachus raises some interesting issues about the human propensity to establish hierarchies and venerate acts of violence. However, his argument that might makes right is not very persuasive and it's embarrassing to the history of philosophy that it was ever taken seriously (and it's embarrassing to the history of Nietzsche scholarship that people maintain that it was Nietzsche's view. Nietzsche couldn't even have seriously maintained that it was the pre-Christian conception of morality, as evidenced by the Republic famously, where Socrates refutes Thrasymachus's view. It would be an interesting exercise to search through the catalog of ancient literature to find all the references to common-sense morality and compare them with the claims of Nietzsche that morality was originally all about noble vs. plebeian. Clearly, something else is going on in Nietzsche, given the fact that he was a classicist.) Humans do have a propensity to establish a hierarchy, to want to defer to a ruler who (ideally) would be superior to other people in strength, charisma, intelligence, etc. It is simply much easier, in a practical sense, to delegate decisions to one member of the tribe and then all come together to execute those decisions. People will even tolerate a little corruption on the part of their leaders, a little embezzlement or nepotism, provided they are doing their jobs as leaders effectively. Indeed, they will even tolerate a little tyranny. But this does not entail, as Thrasymachus says, that the tyranny is morally good, or even morally acceptable. Everyone knows it's wrong. It's simply tolerated as a trade off for effective rule. Tyranny is bad, but chaos is worse. And, when the tyranny exceeds a limit, the people will rebel and remove the tyrant. Thrasymachus also confuses interstate relations with morality. A ruler that invades another state and enslaves all its citizens is celebrated BY HIS OWN STATE because, during war, the members of the other state are temporarily removed from the realm of moral significance. Indeed, one might think that it is a positive moral good, in the most primal sense of morality, to do violence to the enemy. But, again, this does not imply that the victorious state is somehow the arbiter of morality. (344)

"Don’t you know that the love of honor and the love of money are despised, and rightly so?" This seems a patently ridiculous thing to say, especially in Ancient Greece. Why would Thrasymachus assent to it? The paragraph that follows about good people reluctantly accepting positions of power in order to avoid being ruled by someone worse is even more ridiculous. The desire for power is one of our most fundamental drives. There's nothing shameful about it. Here we see further evidence of a sort of Christian celebration of modesty and meekness in Plato, yet he does not put it forward as anything novel. It is a preestablished convention to hide one's ambition, etc. (347)

p.992
